Andrew_campbell
CS
BeWell:_A_Smartphone_Application_to_Monitor
Abstract—A key challenge for mobile health is to develop
new technology that can assist individuals in maintaining a
healthy lifestyle by keeping track of their everyday behaviors.
Smartphones embedded with a wide variety of sensors are
enabling a new generation of personal health applications that
can actively monitor, model and promote wellbeing. Automated
wellbeing tracking systems available so far have focused on
physical fitness and sleep and often require external non-phone
based sensors. In this work, we take a step towards a more
comprehensive smartphone based system that can track activities
that impact physical, social, and mental wellbeing namely, sleep,
physical activity, and social interactions and provides intelligent
feedback to promote better health. We present the design,
implementation and evaluation of BeWell, an automated wellbeing
app for the Android smartphones and demonstrate its feasibility
in monitoring multi-dimensional wellbeing. By providing a more
complete picture of health, BeWell has the potential to empower
individuals to improve their overall wellbeing and identify any
early signs of decline.
I. INTRODUCTION
Our lifestyle choices have a deep impact on our personal
health. For example, our sleep, socialization and exercise
patterns are connected to the presence of a wide range of health
related problems such as, high-blood pressure, stress [1],
anxiety, diabetes and depression [2], [3]. Positive health effects
can be observed when these wellbeing indicators (e.g., sleep,
physical activity) are kept in healthy ranges. However, people
are typically not exposed to these health indicators as they
go about their daily lives. As a result, unbalanced unhealthy
lifestyles are present in the general population. People demonstrate
concern for some aspects of their wellbeing, such as
fitness or diet, yet neglect the wellbeing implications of other
behaviors, such as, poor sleep, hygiene or prolonged social
isolation. We believe this situation is caused by an absence
of adequate tools for effective self-management of overall
wellbeing and health.
We envision a new class of personal wellbeing applications
for smartphones capable of monitoring multiple dimensions
of human behavior, encompassing physical, mental and social
dimensions of wellbeing. An important enabler of this vision
are the recent advances in smartphones, which are equipped
with powerful embedded sensors, such as an accelerometer,
digital compass, gyroscope, GPS, microphone, and camera.
Smartphones present a programable platform for monitoring
wellbeing as people go about their lives [4]. It is now possible
to infer a range of behaviors on the phone in real-time,
allowing users to receive feedback in response to everyday
lifestyle choices that enables them to better manage their
health. In addition, the popularity of smartphone application
stores (e.g., the Apple App Store, Android Market) has opened
an effective software delivery channel whereby a wellbeing
application can be installed in seconds, further lowering the
barrier to user adoption. We believe production-quality wellbeing
applications will gain rapid adoption globally, driven
by: i) near zero user effort, due to automated sensor based
activity inference and ii) universal access, only requiring a
single download from a mobile phone application store and
installation on an off-the-shelf smartphone.
A number of technical barriers need to be tackled to make
this vision a reality. The majority of existing mobile health
systems have focused on a specific health dimension (e.g.,
stress [5], diet [6], physical activity [7]) and consider only
one or two types of behavior. Instead, personal management
of wellbeing requires applications that monitor a diverse
range of daily behaviors, which have broad health related
consequences. Unfortunately the small, but growing, number
of mobile health applications that consider a wider perspective
of user health commonly rely on manual data entry [6].
This type of manual effort is burdensome to users and is
unlikely to scale to mass adoption. Rather, the automated and
continuous inference of the users behavior and environment
based on embedded sensors promotes sustained usage over
the long-term. Ultimately, to be effective these applications
must understand the impact on the health and wellbeing of the
user due to the observed behavioral patterns. Simply reporting
behavioral patterns to the user is not necessarily intuitive. It
can be difficult for a user to identify which behaviors have
a larger impact on wellbeing. Therefore, providing intuitive
and interpretable feedback is a key challenge for wellbeing
monitoring apps.
In this paper, we present BeWell, a personal health application
for smartphones that is designed specifically to help
people manage their overall wellbeing. BeWell continuously
monitors multiple dimensions of behavior and incorporatesApplication
Distribution
MONITOR BEHAVIOR
PROMOTE & INFORM
MODEL
WELLBEING
Fig. 1. BeWell approaches end-user self-management of wellbeing with three
distinct phases. Initially, everyday behaviors are automatically monitored.
Next, the impact of these lifestyle choices on overall personal health is
quantified using a model of wellbeing. Finally, the computed wellbeing
assessment drives feedback designed to promote and inform improved health
levels.
user feedback mechanisms that are able to increase awareness
of how different aspects of lifestyle impact the personal
wellbeing of the user. BeWell uses commercial, off-the-shelf
smartphones (Android Nexus One [8]) to automatically: (i)
monitor a person’s physical activity, social interaction and
sleep patterns; (ii) summarize the effect of the monitored
behavior on wellbeing; and (iii) provide feedback that enables
users to effectively manage these three key aspects of their
health.
The structure of the paper is as follows. Section II discusses
the BeWell architecture and Section III describes the design
of our wellbeing model. Sections IV and V present the detailed
implementation and evaluation of BeWell, respectively.
Section VI discusses the limitations of existing mobile health
systems followed by the concluding remarks presented in
Section VII.
II. BEWELL ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN
In this section, we describe the BeWell architecture which
includes cloud computing servers as well as smartphones. The
operational phases of the BeWell system are shown in Figure
1 and discussed below.
A. Monitor Behavior
The BeWell application automatically infers behavioral patterns
using sensors embedded in smartphones. Rather than
tracking a single wellbeing dimension, such as, physical
activity, the BeWell system concurrently monitors multiple dimensions
(e.g., sleep patterns, social interaction, and physical
activity), representing a more complete picture of the user’s
overall wellbeing. The current implementation of BeWell is
limited to three wellbeing dimensions and does not yet incorporate
a number of other important health components such as
diet and stress. Users are able to manually add new behaviors
by using a diary maintained by the BeWell web portal, which
visually show the inferences made by the application and
allows users to correct classification errors.
B. Model Wellbeing
Simply collecting user patterns of behavior is insufficient.
Users need to easily understand how their behavior affect
different dimensions of their personal wellbeing. Using existing
guidelines provided by healthcare professionals, we
estimate multi-dimensional wellbeing scores that capture the
relationship between behavioral patterns and health outcomes.
C. Promote and Inform End Users
Armed with the ability to track changes in overall wellbeing,
BeWell is able to present users with richer information
and make them self-aware of their current wellbeing.
BeWell presents information in two ways: i) directly, when
the user interacts with the BeWell application installed on their
smartphone or from a desktop using the BeWell web portal;
and, ii) passively, using an ambient display rendered on the
smartphone wallpaper, which is visible as the user performs
typical phone operations (e.g., making a call, texting, etc.).
III. MONITORING AND MODELING WELLBEING
A variety of health outcomes are tightly linked to everyday
decisions involving sleep [9], diet [10], exercise [11] and
socialization [3] patterns. The BeWell monitoring stage involves
sensor-based inferences of user activities (e.g., sleeping,
exercising, socialization). The wellbeing model interprets these
behavioral patterns and estimates a multi-dimensional wellbeing
score to make it easier for the user to understand the impact
on overall wellbeing. Behavioral patterns and estimates of
wellbeing are used to generate user feedback that are designed
to inform users of their current wellbeing, highlighting the
behavior changes needed to improve this state.
Although there are still many unanswered questions about
the links between behavior and wellbeing, in BeWell we take
a pragmatic approach and build an initial wellbeing model,
which can be extended and refined.
Under our proof-of-concept model wellbeing is assessed for
the three behaviors independently, with three simple wellbeing
scores produced that ranges between 0 and 100. Every score
seeks to summarize the impact of recent user behavior on
overall wellbeing for just one of the three behaviors monitored.
A score of 100 indicates the person is matching the accepted
guidelines of performance for that behavior (e.g., averaging
more than 8 hours sleep per day). Scores of 0 indicate
the individual is not even attaining minimum recommended
patterns of behavior. The score for each dimension is computed
using an exponentially weighted average of daily scores along
each dimension. In what follows, we describe the importance
of these three behaviors to overall wellbeing and explain how
the scores, for individual days, are computed.
A. Sleep
A body of literature exists that links sleep hygiene to a
range of mental and physiological health conditions, including,
affective disorders, hypertension, heart disease and the development
of diabetes [9]. However, poor sleep behavior (e.g.,
chronic lack of sleep, erratic sleep cycles) are wide spreadacross the general population. People commonly exchange
sleep for additional waking hours as a coping mechanism for
busy lifestyles.
Research exploring sleep health effects focus both on the
quantity and quality of sleep [12]. Although both of these
facets are important we focus solely on monitoring sleep
duration. We take a simple approach that approximates the
sleep duration of users by measuring mobile phone usage patterns,
as discussed in Section V-B. Studies show oversleeping
(“long sleep”) carries similar negative health consequences to
insufficient sleep [9], thus, we penalize both behaviors. BeWell
computes a wellbeing score for sleep behavior within a single
day using a gaussian function,
sleepday(HRact) = Ae− (HRact−HRideal)2
2(HRhi−HRlo)2
in which HRact is the total quantity of sleep over a 24 hour
period, HRideal is the ideal hours asleep with HRhi and HRlo
being the upper and lower limits of acceptable sleep duration.
Our sleep function is parameterized using a HRideal of 7 hours
with a HRhi of 9 hours and HRlo of 5 hours, these values are
consistent with existing sleep studies [9].
B. Physical Activity
Benefits of physical activity, such as, lower mortality rates
and cardiovascular disease are well-known but health benefits
also extend to cancer and sexual dysfunction [11]. Further, a
number of studies have linked exercise to improved depression,
self-esteem, mood, sleep, and stress [13], [2].
Our automated wellbeing assessment of physical activity
begins with common categories of end-user activity (e.g.,
walking, stationary, running) being recognized by smartphone
sensors. The duration the user spends performing these activities
is computed, allowing the Physical Activities Compendium
metabolic equivalent of task (MET) value [14] to
be estimated each day. Being definitive as to the ideal MET
levels for an individual is difficult as mental and physical
health benefits occur at different levels of activity. These
MET levels are also sensitive to user characteristics, such as,
existing physical fitness or particular genetic determinants. We
currently rely on generic guidelines established by the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention [15] (CDC). Our daily
scores of physical activity are simply a linear regression,
physicalday(METact)=(METhi − METlo)METact + METlo
where METact is the actual MET value for a user during that
day, with METhi and METlo being calibrated by the high-end
and minimum guidelines for adult aerobic activity set by the
CDC. These values range between 300 and 150 minutes of
moderate-intensity per week. Such aerobic activity should be
accompanied by muscle-strengthening programs, ideal behavioral
patterns for these programs are also available from the
CDC and are included within the existing physical activity
guidelines. However, we neglect this aspect of physical activity
due to the inaccuracy in monitoring muscle-strengthening
programs without specialized sensors (e.g., on-body sensors).
Currently, BeWell users enter this behavior manually (see
Section IV-D). In the future, we will study alternatives such
as using coarse inferences based on location or sound.
C. Social Interaction
The daily social interactions of people have been shown to
have impact on many dimensions of wellbeing. The connection
between the availability of social support and psychological
wellbeing is well established, with low levels being linked to
symptoms of depression [3]. Individuals who maintain dense
social connections are more likely to have resilient mental
health. They tend to be able to cope with stress and often are
better able to manage chronic illness.
Medical studies use a variety of measures to capture the
social environment of a person. The development of these measures
are still an active area of research. BeWell focuses on one
of these metrics, social isolation, as it is more easily captured
with sensors available in smartphones today. Studies of particular
high-risk communities show social isolation is correlated
with basic forms of human contact. For example, health deterioration
exhibited in the elderly is linked with, amongst others,
a decline in the frequency of human interaction (e.g., phone
calls and visits with friends and relatives) [16]. In the general
population, those with profound acquired hearing loss have
been seen to suffer a deterioration of psychological wellbeing
due to the associated communication difficulties [17]. We
measure social isolation based on the total duration of ambient
conversations, which are detected by inferences made using the
mobile phone microphone. Insufficient medical evidence exists
to parameterize this relationship. At this time we again use a
wellbeing score for social interaction with a linear regression,
socialday(DURact)=(DURhi − DURlo)DURact + DURlo
where DURact is the duration of conversation detected relative
to the total time the microphone is active during a single day.
We determine empirically a value for DURhi, 0.35, using the
mean conversation ratio of a small 10 person experiment; we
also utilize this group to train our classifiers (see Section V).
As we lack a population in which poor wellbeing has caused
atypical conversation patterns our DURlo ratio is simply set to
zero.
IV. IMPLEMENTATION
In this section, we present the BeWell implementation based
on the architecture discussed in Section II. As illustrated in
Figure 2 the BeWell application and system support consists
of a software suite running on Android smartphones and
cloud infrastructure. The software components installed on the
phones include: i) Sensing Daemon, which is responsible for
sensing, classification, data processing (e.g., privacy preserving
audio processing) and uploading of sensor data; ii) Mobile
BeWell Portal, which displays the user’s behavioral patterns
and the wellbeing score associated with these behaviors; and
iii) Mobile Ambient Wellbeing Display, which provides an
always-on visualization of the user’s wellbeing scores. TheSensing Daemon
Network Interface
Classification
Models
Feature
Extraction
ML Library
Storage
Sensors
GUI
Sensing
Daemon
Mobile
BeWell
Portal
Mobile
Ambient
Wellbeing
Display
Nginix Load Balancer
RESTful
Interface
Node 1
RESTful
Interface
Node n
 o o o o o o o
Node Pool MySQL DB
Cloud Infrastructure
Wellbeing
Model
Cloud Infrastructure Smartphone
Desktop BeWell Portal
Sleep
Model
Behavior
Stats
Wellbeing
Model
Audio
Cleaning
Behavior
Stats
Audio
Cleaning
Fig. 2. BeWell implementation, including smartphone components supported by a scalable cloud system
BeWell Cloud Infrastructure provides storage, computation,
and web access to user data via the Desktop BeWell Portal.
A. Sensing Daemon
The BeWell Sensing Daemon combines an internally developed
platform-independent machine learning C library with
device specific components, written in Java, that are responsible
for communication, storage and the user interface. These
core components are connected with a JNI bridge. The control
flow of the daemon is comprised of two independently operating
processes. The first process, the classification pipeline
is responsible for the inference of end-user behavior. The
pipeline continuously samples the phone sensors and extracts
features used by classification models, which also run on the
phone. The second process, asynchronously transfers inferences
made by the classification models and the raw sensor
data to the cloud infrastructure used by BeWell.
The classification pipeline samples three sensors, the
GPS, accelerometer and microphone. Using audio sensor
data the pipeline recognizes social interaction based
on classifying {voicing, non-voicing} audio segments. The
accelerometer data is used to classify everyday behaviors
necessary to monitor the user’s physical activity
including {driving, stationary, running, walking}. Inferences
are made by applying a combination of feature and
classification models developed in previous work, SoundSense
[18] and Jigsaw [18]. Specifically, we use time (e.g.,
mean and variance) and frequency domain features (e.g.,
spectral roll-off for audio) that are classified using a Naive
Bayes classifier based on a multi-variate Gaussian Model for
each class. A simple Markov Model is used to apply temporal
smoothing to the resulting stream of inferences.
The BeWell sleep model is based on a simple but effective
approach to modeling the sleep duration of the user (see Section
V-B). The classification process is based on features we
extract from the phone, specifically, the frequency and duration
of: phone recharging events (since often people recharge their
phones overnight); and the periods when the phone is either
stationary or in a near silent sound environment. These features
are not continuously computed rather they are extracted and
computed every 24 hours. We found an effective estimate of
user sleep duration could be achieved using a simple logistic
regression model which incorporated a prior based on typical
adult sleeping patterns.
All data is stored within independent SQLite files. These
files are transferred to the cloud infrastructure with an uploading
policy that emphasizes energy efficiency to minimize the
impact of using the phone’s batteries. Uploading only occurs if
the phone has both line-power and WiFi networking available.
Sensor data is uploaded to the cloud to make additional context
available to end-users so they can verify, and if necessary add
or edit, inferences made by the Sensing Daemon. However,
people are sensitive to sharing sensor data. To address these
concerns users are given complete control of the sensors
being used on the phone, and inferences made, through user
configuration options. Privacy controls are further augmented
with automated voicing filtering. As a result, raw audio is
never stored if voicing is detected within ±5 seconds, reducing
the chance that conversations are captured.
B. Mobile BeWell Portal
The Mobile BeWell Portal provides a simplified mobile
phone version of the BeWell portal allowing users to track their
current and historical wellbeing scores and view an automated
activity diary (see Section IV-D). Users can view trends in the
their behavioral patterns as well as their wellbeing scores.
C. Mobile Ambient Wellbeing Display
In addition to the more interactive mobile portal discussed
above, BeWell also supports an ambient wellbeing display to
provide constant feedback of a user’s current wellbeing state.
The BeWell ambient display is an animation rendered on the
phone’s lock-screen and wallpaper making it visible to the user
whenever they glance or interact with their smartphone. Prior
examples of effective mobile health applications have found
that mobile phone wallpaper is an effective ambient display
able to promote changes in user behavior (e.g., UbiFit Garden
[7]). The BeWell ambient display represents overall wellbeing
as three independent scores each corresponding to sleep,
activity and social interactions, as discussed in Section III.
Each wellbeing dimension is captured by different characters
in an aquatic ecosystem, as shown in Figure 4. The animated
activities of the orange clown fish represents the recent activityFig. 3. The BeWell web portal provides access to an automated diary of
activities and wellbeing scores.
Fig. 4. Multiple wellbeing dimensions are displayed on the smartphone
wallpaper. An animated aquatic ecosystem is shown with three different
animals, the behavior of each is effected by changes in user wellbeing.
level of the user; the turtle’s movement reflects a user’s sleep
patterns; and a school of fish indicates the sociability of the
user. By quickly glancing at the screen at different times
during the day the user gets a quick summary of their overall
wellbeing. If the user clicks on the star fish character on the
ambient display a pop-up dialog box is displayed with the
numerical values that drive the animation. The relationship
between the ambient display and the wellbeing scores is
described below:
1) Turtle: Sleep patterns are captured by the turtle. The
turtle sleeps on behalf of the user; that is, when the user lacks
sleep the turtle sleeps for the user. When the user is getting
enough sleep, the dimension score is high and the turtle comes
out of its shell and walks around with varying degrees of
energy.
2) Clown Fish: The clown fish represents the physical activity
of the user. The score modifies the speed and movements
of the clown fish. At low levels of physical activity the fish
moves slowly from across the screen. As physical activity
increases the clown fish moves more vigorously and even
performs summersaults and back flips when the user has high
levels of activity.
3) School of Fish: Like the clown fish a school of yellow
fish also swims across the screen. The size of the school of
fish grows in proportion to the amount of social interaction
by the user. In addition, the school and the clown fish swim
closer together as social interaction increases.
D. Desktop BeWell Portal
BeWell users are able to access a web portal, as shown
in Figure 3. The portal provides two primary services: i) to
provide an automated diary-like visualization of the behavioral
patterns and wellbeing scores of the user, which users are also
able to manually edit; and, ii) to collect self-report survey
data using standard validated medical surveys that monitor
depression, sleep and overall wellbeing.
The diary-like visualization allows users to both browse and
edit the behavioral inferences made by the BeWell Sensing
Daemon. Users are able to access any sensor data collected
by their phone during the day to assist with their recall of
events. Users can access their location, listen to ambient (nonconversational)
audio and view the raw time-series graphs
of their accelerometer and microphone data. This additional
context assists users to recall, for example, when they actually
woke up, or identify inference errors, such as a period of
walking misclassified as jogging. Users are also able to manually
add activities that are unable to be inferred by BeWell,
but that may still impact wellbeing. For example, types of
exercise such as swimming, which the Sensing Daemon can
not recognize, or social interactions, that can be missed if the
user forgets to carry their phone or turns it off. For those
activities that are forms of exercise users are able to select
any physical activity in the Physical Activities Compendium
[14]. Wellbeing scores are updated based on both automatic
sensor data from the phone and through the manual input by
the user via the portal.
E. Cloud Infrastructure
The cloud infrastructure supporting the BeWell application
is a pool of standard Linux-based servers. Servers offer a
variety of support services to BeWell components via RESTful
interfaces. These RESTful services perform the following
functions: i) to store the SQLite files uploaded from mobile
phones along with all user input (e.g., survey responses,
activity diary edits) collected by the mobile or desktop BeWell
portals; and, ii) to respond to queries for raw data, wellbeing
scores or inference data which are made by all three components
(viz. Sensing Daemon, Mobile and Desktop BeWellBeWell Sensing Daemon
CPU Usage Memory Usage
GUI only 0% 13511K
Audio sensor only 2% 14373K
Accel sensor only 2% 13917K
Audio classification 25% 14778K
Accel classification on 11% 14736K
Both Accel and Audio classification 31% 15357K
Benchmark Applications
CPU Usage Memory Usage
MP3 Player 16% 27056K
Web Browser 5% 62376K
TABLE I
ANDROID NEXUS ONE CPU AND MEMORY USAGE FOR BEWELL AND
BENCHMARK APPLICATIONS
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Experiment Subjects
Data Generated (MBs)
Fig. 5. Daily data generation by subjects during one week experiment
Portal).
In addition, there are continuous background daemons running
on each server that perform two key tasks: i) to update
the wellbeing scores of users based on incoming inferences;
and, ii) to clean all the audio provided by smartphones to
further protect user privacy. The cleaning process makes it
difficult to inadvertently overhear conversations, which may
be accidentally recorded despite the safe-guards implemented
on the phone, as discussed in Section IV-A. The cleaning
procedure segments each one second of audio into 12 chunks,
where every 3rd chunk is zero-ed out. We find this is a simple
and effective way to further clean the audio data beyond the
voicing based protection implemented on the phone.
V. EVALUATION
In this section, we perform experiments that validate the
design and implementation of the BeWell application. First,
we benchmark the resource consumption of BeWell operating
on an Android Nexus One phone. We demonstrate that an
automated wellbeing monitoring app, such as BeWell, can be
deployed on an off-the-shelf smartphone. Next, we examine
the accuracy of BeWell’s behavior monitoring through a five
person experiment. Finally, we show the wellbeing scores
collected over one week by a single user.
A. Benchmarks
We profile the performance of the BeWell prototype application
on an Android Nexus One smartphone, for CPU, battery,
memory and storage. Phones in this experiment are equipped
0
3
6
9
12
15
18
21
24
Experiment Subjects
Battery Life (hrs)
Fig. 6. Smartphone battery life for subjects during experiment
Voicing Walking Stationary Running
Accuracy 85.3% 90.3% 94.3% 98.1%
TABLE II
BEHAVIOR CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY
with an extended life battery (3200 mAh) and 4 GB microSD
card.
Table I reports memory and CPU usage during different
operational phases (e.g., sensing, inference) of the BeWell
Sensing Daemon. As the table shows, CPU and memory
usage vary significantly depending on the operational phase
occurring within the daemon. Not surprisingly, the more
burdensome phases involve inference, which encompasses
sensor sampling, feature extraction and classification. Under
all phases the CPU usage and memory never exceed 31% and
16 MB, respectively. Table I includes a comparison of BeWell
with two widely used Android applications (viz. playing MP3
music and browsing the web). A web browser is an example
of an application users will use during the day from time to
time. Table I shows that BeWell and the web browser can
co-exist within resource limitations. Both the MP3 player and
the BeWell Sensing Daemon are background processes, and so
are designed to be run for long periods of time. Table I shows
the MP3 player’s CPU usage when averaged over 5 minutes
uses more resources than the BeWell Sensing Daemon. This
suggests our daemon is competitive with existing applications
in terms of resource efficiency.
We perform a five person experiment which captures battery
life performance and data generation rates for BeWell.
Subjects are asked to go about their normal daily routines.
Figures 5 and 6 present per-subjects values for daily data
generation and battery life, respectively. Battery life varies
from user to user by 36%. This value increases to 42% for data
generation. However, the results for data generation indicate
that 4 GB external microSD storage is sufficient. Similarly, the
experiment shows that the battery life is consistently above 15
hours, which is sufficient to run BeWell for an entire day if
recharged once, very briefly during the day, as well as each
night.
B. Behavioral Inference Accuracy
The accuracy of the classification process is critically important
to the overall performance of BeWell. We perform a seriesRMSE MAE
Linear Regression 2.18 hrs 1.54 hrs
Logistic regression 2.254 hrs 1.56 hrs
TABLE III
SLEEP DURATION ESTIMATE ERROR
of experiments to test the accuracy of the BeWell classification
models (i.e., activity and social interaction classifiers) and
sleep model. Models are trained prior to these experiments
using training data from 10 people. To maintain consistency
across all users for each experiment all subjects position the
phone in the same body location, and attach the phone to their
hip using a holster we provide.
Our results find that inference accuracy is inline with previous
mobile phone sensing experiments [18], [19] conducted
with a larger number of subjects. This is expected as our
classification models leverage prior work. Table II shows the
accuracy for a 5 person experiment where subjects record
ground-truth activity diaries for a week.
To validate our sleep model the same 5 users complete
a daily survey of sleep duration, using the BeWell web
portal. Table III provides the root mean square error (RMSE)
and mean absolute error (MAE) when the sleep model uses
either logistic or linear regression. The results show that a
simple model that correlates phone recharging, movement and
ambient sound context is sufficient to predict the amount of
hours slept within ±1.5 hours. Medical studies suggest that
there is little difference in health outcomes for people who
have sleep durations that differ by only ±1 hour. Therefore,
our coarse sleep model which is solely based on a user’s
phone, and not on specialized sensors worn while asleep, is
adequate for a wellbeing monitoring application.
Raw inference accuracy is only one contributing factor
towards how effectively wellbeing is assessed for the physical
activity and social interaction of users. In the case of social
interaction, for example, our voicing based approach is open to
being confused by ambient sound from activities that are not
actual conversations (e.g., when the user is watching TV). To
test this we perform an experiment involving three people. We
randomly select days during the week and require the subject
to keep a detailed log of their social interactions for the entire
day and evening. From this experiment we find that on average
BeWell overestimates true social interaction by 14%. As part
of our future work we plan to study more robust techniques for
conversation recognition (e.g., using temporal characteristics
of conversations such as turn taking).
Similarly, there will be inaccuracies when monitoring user
activities that contribute to physical wellbeing. For example,
the process of computing METs based on just the “average”
energy expended during different categories of activity will
introduce noise (e.g., inter-person variation due to weight
or sex). However, this is not a new problem. We use the
Physical Activities Compendium [14] to compute METs as is
standard practice. BeWell potentially introduces an additional
error associated with correctly computing the duration of
an activity due, for example, to errors in classification. To
quantify this error, we compute the difference in ground-truth
Mon Tues Wed Thurs Fri Sat Sun 20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Weekdays
Wellbeing Scores
activity
sleep
social
Fig. 7. Automated wellbeing assessments for single representative user
and estimated duration for all BeWell physical activities. We
find that duration error averages 22% across all of the users in
the experiment. As part of our future work, we plan to study
more accurate techniques to compute energy expended during
activities; for example, [20] demonstrates that mobile phones
can estimate day-long calorie expenditure with 80% accuracy.
C. Wellbeing Experiment
We perform an experiment in which a single subject uses
BeWell to monitor their wellbeing for one week. Figure 7
shows the scores for each wellbeing dimension during the
experiment. This is a representative result shown here to
illustrate the system in operation. Our preliminary experiment
is promising, we observe the scores produced by BeWell
correspond to the behavioral patterns of the user for this
particular week. Early in the week the social wellbeing score
for the user is low, as the subject worked from home. This
score climbs later in week as the user interacts with people in
the office and again over the weekend. Sleep is fairly consistent
throughout the week but dips by Sunday. The subject works
out on weekends and this is reflected in a sharp increase in
the activity wellbeing score.
VI. RELATED WORK
There is a growing number of projects in mobile health.
However, few apply a holistic approach to the continuous
monitoring of wellbeing. Most focus on specific health concerns
(e.g., sleep [21]), with the majority of wellbeing tracking
systems focusing on physical activity [7], [22]. There is
growing interest in systems that take a wider perspective on
health. Recent devices (e.g., Fitbit [23]) monitor a broader
range of behaviors that impact wellbeing, such as sleep,
but require the user to carry a separate dedicated device.
BALANCE [24] only monitors one particular aspect of wellbeing,
calorie intake and expenditure. It moves beyond only
monitoring physical activity, however, it still falls short of truly
addressing wellbeing more broadly. Existing wellbeing smartphone
applications commonly suffer from an over reliance
on burdensome manual user input to gather data, rather than
automated sensor-based inferences; and, largely ignore the
need to interpret the consequences to wellbeing for the user,
based on the data they collect. AndWellness [25] considers arange of health outcomes but relies on experience sampling
to collect user behavior. Although, the monitoring of user
behavior is not automatic AndWellness does make use of
sensors to intelligently trigger user surveys at more opportune
times. In [6], the investigators propose a system that combines
self-report with a medical practitioner observing the trends
and providing advice via email. This completely manual data
entry, and feedback from the practitioners, limits scalability
and long-term use. Broad wellbeing has been explored using
separate applications that assist in different aspects [26] but
this requires users to monitor their own state and select the
correct application to address their difficulties. Similarly, [27],
[28] consider a comprehensive range of wellbeing but both
rely on manual data entry, such as a diary. BeWell focuses
on sensing and monitoring wellbeing dimensions just using
embedded phone sensors.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we discussed the design, implementation
and evaluation of BeWell, a personal health application for
smartphones capable of automatically monitoring a user’s
overall wellbeing. BeWell is a real-time, continuous sensing
application that provides easily digested feedback that promotes
healthier lifestyle decisions. Feedback from BeWell can
help users better understand the wellbeing impact of their day
to day social interaction, physical activity and sleep patterns.
Our prototype BeWell implementation demonstrates the viability
of personal wellbeing applications using off-the-shelf
smartphones. We plan to conduct a large-scale deployment and
user study of BeWell to better understand how different users,
with different lifestyles, can benefit from this new generation
of personal pervasive health applications.