Elizabeth Cascio
Economics
Cracks in the Melting Pot
        Cracks in the Melting Pot: Immigration, School Choice, and Segregation 
       
             By Elizabeth U. Cascio and Ethan G. Lewis* 
           
We examine whether low-skilled immigration to the U.S. has contributed to 
immigrants' residential isolation by reducing native demand for public 
schools. We address endogeneity in school demographics using established 
Mexican settlement patterns in California and use a comparison group to account for immigration's broader effects. We estimate that between 1970 
and 2000, the average California school district lost more than 14 non- 
Hispanic households with children to other districts in its metropolitan area 
for every 10 additional households enrolling low-English Hispanics in its 
public schools. By disproportionately isolating children, the native reaction to immigration may have longer-run consequences than previously thought. 



      Americans have long revealed distaste for racial and socioeconomic diversity in social 
     
interactions by sorting residentially. In recent years, this distaste has been manifested in the 

native response to a large wave of low-skilled immigration to the U.S. from the developing 

world, particularly Central America. These new immigrants are residentially isolated (David M. 

Cutler, Edward L. Glaeser, and Jacob L. Vigdor 2008a), due in part to relocation of natives from 

the neighborhoods where they settle (Albert Saiz and Susan Wachter 2011). Physical separation 

from natives may reduce immigrants' access to social networks, economic opportunities, and 

public services, like education, that weigh heavily in their future economic prospects. 

      The consequences of "native flight" for immigrants nevertheless depend on what is 
     
driving it. If native relocation is driven in part by reductions in demand for public schools, for 

example, then immigrant children may be especially isolated, and it could have impacts that last 

generations. We investigate this possibility in the present paper, testing whether school districts 

                                       
that saw greater increases in low-skilled Hispanic school enrollment in recent decades have also 

experienced greater reductions in the settlement rate of non-Hispanic children. The hypothesis 

has not received much attention. Yet, demographic change in public schools has historically 

played an important role in residential choice in the U.S. For example, increases in minority 

enrollment in predominantly white schools generated considerable departures of white children 

from school districts court-ordered to desegregate starting in the 1960s (Sarah J. Reber 2005, 

Nathaniel Baum-Snow and Byron F. Lutz forthcoming).1 

      The fact that rising low-skilled Hispanic enrollment is tied to immigrant settlement - not 
     
to policy - presents two challenges for our analysis. First, rising low-skilled Hispanic enrollment 

is associated with an increased immigrant presence in a community overall, which could have 

independent effects on where non-Hispanic children reside. Second, immigrant settlement in a 

district may be non-random with respect to other district characteristics that non-Hispanic 

parents value when choosing a residence. 

      We account for the other impacts of immigration by comparing changes in the settlement 
     
patterns of non-Hispanic children to those of non-Hispanic adults of "parenting age," which we 

define as under age 50.2 Differencing across these groups attenuates our estimates, since the 

settlement response of parents in the comparison group will be identical to that of children. But 

the presence of adults who are not parents in the comparison group means that differencing rids 

our estimates of some bias from immigration's broader effects. While this approach may not 

remove all such bias, childless non-Hispanic adults under age 50 are similar in many ways to 




1




The appearance of declining school performance can also lead to population losses (David N. Figlio and Maurice 

E. Lucas 2004). A considerable hedonic literature also speaks to these issues. For example, Sandra E. Black (1999) 
estimates willingness to pay for a neighborhood school with higher average test scores, while Thomas J. Kane, 
Stephanie K. Riegg, and Douglas O. Staiger (2006) and Leah Platt Boustan (forthcoming) estimate willingness to 

pay for schools with lower minority enrollment shares. 
2 More specifically, we define 0 to 19 year olds as children and 20 to 49 year olds as parent-age adults. It is 
unfortunately impossible for us to conduct the analysis on households with and without children given constraints in 
available data. We can however approximate what we would observe at the household level if data were available, as discussed below. 
                                       2
                                       
their counterparts with children, as we discuss below, suggesting that their reaction to 

immigration may be similar to the reaction we would see from parents if immigration had no 

impact on school demographics. 

      We confront endogeneity in immigrant inflows by borrowing an instrument from 
     
research on immigration's labor market impacts that exploits the initial size of immigrant 

communities (e.g., David Card 2001), the idea being that these communities attract new 

immigrants but are on average similar to other locations in their appeal to natives. In particular, 

our analysis exploits variation in the initial size of Mexican communities and focuses on 

California over 1970 to 2000. Mexican immigration was the main driver of growth in the low- 

skilled Hispanic U.S. population over this period and had particularly dramatic impacts on 

California's demographics: As shown in Figure 1, first- and second-generation Mexicans 

accounted for over a quarter of children in the state by 2000, up from 5.4 percent in 1970. Given 

the differencing approach described above, our use of this instrument does not require that it be 

related to unobserved determinants of overall non-Hispanic settlement, but rather only that it be 

unrelated to unobserved determinants of the difference in settlement patterns across non- 

Hispanic children and adults of parenting age. 

      The historical roots of Mexican immigration to California make for compelling 
     
application of this instrumental variables strategy. By 1970, Mexicans were spread throughout 

California, not concentrated in few places where they would have already been differentially 

affecting the residential choices of non-Hispanic parents.3 Supporting this, the instrument does 

not predict differences in school district of residence between non-Hispanic children and parent- 

age adults in California as of 1970 or changes in this difference over the 1960s - before the 

massive influx of Mexican immigrants to the state shown in Figure 1. Many potential correlates 





3





For example, the Bracero Program drew Mexicans to the California countryside as farm labor starting in the 1940s. 
                                      3
                                      
                                      
of trends in district choice of non-Hispanic parents, such as public school resources prior to 

California's school finance equalization, are also not significantly correlated with the instrument. 

                         [Figure 1 about here] 
                    
      The data to carry out our analysis come from numerous sources. Federal administrative 
     
data offer counts of Hispanic students in grades K through 12 with low English proficiency, a 

hallmark of low skill among recent immigrants and a salient marker of immigrant status for non- 

Hispanics. These data were collected to monitor compliance with federal civil rights law and 

have previously been used for research on school desegregation (e.g., Elizabeth Cascio et al. 

2010). District population data are drawn from published Census tabulations. 

      Our findings show that Mexican-receiving school districts in metropolitan California saw 
     
larger departures of non-Hispanic children than parent-age adults between 1970 and 2000. The 

estimates imply that a school district in California lost on average more than 14 non-Hispanic 

households with children for every 10 additional households enrolling low-English Hispanic 

children in its public schools across these three decades.4 Non-Hispanic children in districts with 

larger increases in low-English Hispanic enrollment shares also saw a greater increase in the 

probability of enrolling in private school over the period.5 This finding complements our 

interpretation that the differential relocation of non-Hispanic children to Mexican immigration 

was driven by reductions in demand for public education. Our estimates are furthermore 

comparable in magnitude to the white enrollment and population losses associated with increased 

exposure to blacks after court-ordered school desegregation in the 1960s and 1970s (Reber 2005, 

Baum-Snow and Lutz forthcoming). 






4






That the household displacement rate is larger than one-for-one implies that our estimates cannot be entirely 

accounted for by an inelastic supply of housing suitable for households with children. 
5 This complements evidence of such an effect at the metropolitan area level (Julian R. Betts and Robert W. Fairlie 2003). 
                                       4
                                       
       The comparison to desegregation is helpful in placing our estimates into historical 
     
context, suggesting that shocks to school demographics continue to shape patterns of residential 

segregation today. More generally, our estimates suggest that residential sorting by natives in 

response to immigration may disproportionately affect children. The residential segregation of 

recent immigrants may thus limit their acquisition of human capital for generations.6 This issue 

is a pressing one for future research, as immigration will likely drive growth in school enrollment 

in the U.S. into the foreseeable future. 7 

I. 	Immigration and District Choice in Theory 

      While the empirical analysis to follow focuses on movements of people in response to 
     
immigration due to data constraints, at base our research question concerns the location decisions 

of households. The framework presented in this section highlights the conditions under which 

we might interpret household location decisions as isolating an impact of immigration on 

demand for public education, providing a starting point for discussion of our empirical strategy. 

      Suppose that households are exogenously assigned to different metropolitan areas by job 
      
opportunities, and within metropolitan area, choose a school district in which to reside.8 In 

equilibrium, the utility, V, associated with the school district of settlement for a household must 

be at least as large as the highest available to it elsewhere in the metropolitan area, v: 

(1) 	V?? p, q, k , i???? v . 








6








Cutler, Glaeser, and Vigdor (2008b) show that residential isolation may reduce the skill acquisition of low-skilled 

i7mmigrants. 
 Low-English enrollment accounts for almost all of recent enrollment growth in public schools. (See "New to 
English (Interactive Graphic)." The New York Times, March 13, 2009. Accessed August 8, 2009 at 
http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2009/03/13/us/EL-students.html?ref=education.) 
8 Metropolitan areas are constructed to capture labor markets. It is common to assume that metropolitan areas also define markets for schools (e.g., Caroline M. Hoxby 2000, Miguel Urquiola 2005, Jesse M. Rothstein 2006). The 
assumption of exogeneity in metropolitan area of settlement is a simplification and is not required for identification in our analysis. 
                                       5
                                       
Utility is decreasing in housing costs, p, and (weakly) increasing in the output of public schools, 

q.9 Utility is also (weakly) decreasing in both the low-English Hispanic enrollment share in 

public schools, k, and the overall low-skilled Hispanic share in the population, i. Both capture 

distaste for diversity, but on different dimensions: in schools (k) and elsewhere in the 

community (i).10 k is increasing in i. 

      Now suppose that a district's schools receive an influx of low-English Hispanic students 
     
as a result of immigration. Non-Hispanic demand for district residence may decline because of a 

distaste for diversity in schools (??V??k?? 0 ), or because low-English Hispanic students lower 


school output, e.g., through reductions in school resources or peer effects in the classroom 

(???V??q??? q??k??? 0 ).11 The reduced-form effect of interest could work through either channel. 

But non-Hispanic demand for the district may also fall if low-skilled Hispanic neighbors are 

undesirable for other reasons (??V??i?? 0 ). If the housing supply is not perfectly elastic, the 


underlying population growth will also lower non-Hispanic demand for the district by raising 

housing costs (???V??p???p??i??? 0 ) (Saiz 2003, Saiz 2007). 

      Thus, there are reasons besides changing school demographics that non-Hispanic 
     
households with children may choose not to locate in districts with growing low-English 

Hispanic enrollment shares. As described, we attempt to isolate the effect of changing school 

demographics by using a comparison group. If some set of other households (group 0) on 




9




Housing costs include both the (rental) price of housing and taxes. Utility would generally be modeled as 

increasing in income less these housing costs, or potential consumption. We abstract from the effects of income here since cross-district moves within a labor market are not likely to change it. 
10 i also captures the effects of immigration on local public goods besides education. 
11 California institutions may have limited the impact of low-English Hispanics on school output. For most of the period of study, California maintained systems of bilingual education, whereby students could spend an extended 
period in separate classes taught in Spanish, and highly egalitarian school finance. Thus, spillovers to native 
students would have been attenuated, and reductions in property values as a result of immigration would not have manifested in lower school spending. On the other hand, since California's system equalizes current funding and 
not facilities, increases in low-English Hispanic enrollment may have exacerbated crowding in schools. These 
students may have also indirectly reduced already limited resources for native students if bilingual education is more expensive and inadequately funded. 
                                       6
                                       
average reacts in the same way as non-Hispanic households with children (group 1) to changes in 

other district attributes that accompany an increase in k (i.e.,??V1??i????V0??i and 

?V1??p????V0??p ), the difference in the two groups' probabilities of choosing the district will 

reveal whether the presence of low-English Hispanics in public schools has made it less 

attractive. Differencing will however understate the effect of interest to that extent that changes 

in k also affect the utility of households without children; for example, some households without 

children may anticipate having them soon. 

      An additional complication for estimation is that the same basic model in (1) underlies 
     
the residential choices of immigrants. They may be attracted to declining school districts by 

lower rents, in which case departures of non-Hispanic children from a district might generate 

increases in k, not the opposite.12 Or a positive shock might disproportionately attract 

households with children, regardless of origin, possibly generating a positive correlation between 

k and the presence of non-Hispanic children.13 We approach this identification problem using 

the instrumental variables approach described below. The basic idea is that an initial Mexican 

presence attracted substantial new Mexican settlement - and drove up low-English Hispanic 

enrollment - independently of other, unobserved factors that made the district more or less 

attractive for non-Hispanic children over time. 

II. 	Econometric Specification and Data 

A. 	Basic Model 

      Working off the framework presented above, we would ideally test whether the change 
     
over time in the relative probability that non-Hispanic households with children chose a district 





12 






For example, Boustan (2010) shows that the foreign-born were attracted to center cities that whites had earlier fled 

in response to black in-migration. 
13 Saiz and Wachter (2011), for example, argue that new housing development attracted immigrants and natives to the same Census tracts over the period that we study here. 
                                       7
                                       
is related to the change over time in the district's low-English Hispanic enrollment share. Such a 

model is: 


(2) 


? N 1d,m N 1m???? N 0,m N 0??????kd?? x?d,m????? d,m , 

?

???

d

m

?



where ?kd represents the change over time in the low-English Hispanic enrollment share in 


district d,???N 1d,m N 1m??????N 0,m N 0?? represents the change over time in the proportion of non- 

d

m



Hispanic households with children (group 1) relative to the comparison group (group 0) in 

metropolitan area m who chose district d, and xd,m represents other observed factors that may 

affect a district's desirability among non-Hispanic parents.14 If the comparison group satisfies 

the assumptions laid out in the previous section, the parameter?? will isolate the non-Hispanic 

location in response to changing school demographics. 

      Data constraints make it impossible for us to estimate model (2).15 Instead, we define the 
     
treatment group as non-Hispanic 0 to 19 year olds (children) and the comparison group as non- 

Hispanic 20 to 49 year olds (adults of parenting age) using available data on population by age 

and ethnicity at the district level. That is, our estimating equation is: 



(3) 


? N 0?m19 N 0?19???? N 20,m?49 N 20?49????~??kd?? x?d,m~?? ud,m , 

?

d, 

m

???

d

m

?

?


where???N a,m N a?? represents the change over time in the share of non-Hispanics in age group 
d	m

a in metropolitan area m living in district d.??~ is similar in interpretation to?? , giving how 

much larger a proportion of a metropolitan area's non-Hispanic children than adults of parenting 

age chose an alternative district with a rise in its low-English Hispanic enrollment share. But 

because many parenting-age adults are "treated" by having children in the household,??~ should 




14 




We show in Online Appendix B that ? can be interpreted as the difference across groups in the sensitivity of 

location decisions to low-English Hispanic enrollment share, k, in a household-level linear model of district choice that is motivated by the theoretical model presented in Section I. We specify the model in differences because our 
instrumental variable for??kd derives from flows of Mexican immigrants and thus cannot be specified in levels. 
15 Counts of households by presence of children are not broken out by the age of the householder at the school 
district level. Below, we describe the importance of age in defining the comparison group. 
                                       8
                                       
be lower in magnitude than?? in model (1). In approximation,??~ in fact understates?? by a 

factor proportional to the share of parenting-age adults with children in the household, which we 

use below to convert estimates of??~ to "displacement rates" at the household level.16 

      The comparison group implicit in our analysis thus consists of childless non-Hispanics 
     
under age 50. For our estimates to have the desired interpretation - capturing residential choices 

tied to demand for public schools - the assumption that must hold in an analysis of household 

data must also hold here. That is, it must be the case that the comparison group on average 

reacts in the same way as the treatment group to all other changes in district attributes that 

accompany a rise in low-English Hispanic enrollment. Our comparison group is not the same as 

the treatment group in all respects,17 but it is quite similar along a dimension that should matter: 

non-Hispanics under age 50 express similar views about immigration regardless of the presence 

of children in their household. By contrast, older non-Hispanics express relatively negative 



















16 



















We show in Online Appendix B that??~????1???? 20?49??? where?? 20?49 represents the fraction of non-Hispanic 20 to 

49 year olds who are parents. In 2000 Census microdata for metropolitan California (Steven J. Ruggles et al. 2010), 
? 20?49?? 0.55 , suggesting that our estimates should be scaled up by about 2.2 (=1/0.45) to represent the outflows of 
non-Hispanic households with children. This is the conversion factor we use below, but we also describe sensitivity 
of the estimates to alternative assumptions on its value. It is also possible to directly estimate?? using population 
data and a more complex estimation procedure, also described in Online Appendix B. 
17 As of the 2000 Census (Ruggles et al. 2010), California's non-Hispanics with kids had about nine percent higher 
household income than other California non-Hispanics under age 50, largely because the adults in them are older (on 
average, 4.5 years). They were, however, slightly less educated. It is not immediately obvious how such 
characteristics would affect settlement patterns in response to immigration, but it seems plausible that the effects of education and income could be offsetting. 
                                       9
                                       
views.18 Elimination of older Californians from the comparison group is also justified in light of 

the considerably higher tax costs of moving they face as a result of Proposition 13.19 

      In estimating (3), we restrict attention to a long change - from 1970 to 2000. We 
     
construct the dependent variable using data from the 1970 and 2000 school district tabulations 

(SDT) of the U.S. Census of Population (National Center for Education Statistics (NCES) 1970, 

NCES 2000).20 For the change in the low-English Hispanic enrollment share, we use district- 

level public school enrollment in grades K-12 by ethnicity and need for accommodation for poor 

English language skills from the Elementary and Secondary School Civil Rights Surveys. The 

first year in which these data are available for all districts is 1976 (Office for Civil Rights (OCR) 

1978).21 The next year in which these surveys included all districts was 2000 (OCR 2000). Thus, 

while we would have liked to estimate (3) with higher frequency (e.g., decadal) data, such data is 

not available for a key variable.22 Our main estimates are also unweighted, representing how 

low-English Hispanic enrollment growth affected the average district, but our findings are 

substantively similar when we weight by the (initial) number of non-Hispanic children in the 


18 


We examined responses to four questions asking "How much do you agree or disagree with the statement[s]" in 

the 2004 wave of the General Social Survey (James A. Davis and Tom W. Smith 2009): (1) "Immigrants increase 
crime rates," (2) "Immigrants take jobs away from people who were born in America," (3) "Immigrants are generally good for America's economy," and (4) "America should take stronger measures to exclude illegal 
immigrants." Among non-Hispanics under age 50 with and without kids, the fraction with negative views of 
immigrants for each question are, respectively: (1) 0.227 and 0.266; (2) 0.442 and 0.445; (3) 0.270 and 0.273; and (4) 0.655 and 0.646. None of these differences are statistically significant. In contrast, non-Hispanics over age 50 
are 7 percentage points more likely (than non-Hispanics under age 50 with kids) to agree that immigration raises 
crime, and 16 percentage points more likely to want to take stronger measures to exclude illegal immigrants (both 

significant). 
19 Proposition 13 (1978) effectively locked in property taxes for existing homeowners by establishing a statewide 
property tax rate of 1 percent and setting assessed valuations of property at 1975 levels, with a maximum increase of 2 percent per year and no re-assessment. Propositions 60 and 90 in 1986 and 1988, respectively, allowed individuals aged 55 and over to transfer this tax benefit to a new home, but only one of equal or lesser value (Fernando Ferreira 

2010). 
20 Because school districts are sometimes missing in the SDT, we obtain non-Hispanic population at the MSA level using separately-reported county level aggregates downloaded from the National Historical Geographic Information 

System (Minnesota Population Center 2004), rather than by aggregating across school districts. 
21 These surveys were conducted to monitor compliance with civil rights law. Non-native English speakers became 
protected under federal law as a result of the Equal Educational Opportunity Act of 1974, and the Department of 
Health, Education, and Welfare set forth guidelines for accommodation and began monitoring district compliance in 
1975. The lack of data prior to 1976 likely has little effect on our findings since most of the 1970 to 2000 increase in California's Mexican population occurred after 1976 (Figure 1). 
22 The 1980 SDT also lacks sufficient disaggregation of population by age and ethnicity to apply our empirical strategy. 
                                      10 
                                      
district to represent effects for the average non-Hispanic child. Standard errors in all tables allow 

for arbitrary error correlation within metropolitan areas. 

B. 	Instrument 

      Ordinary least squares (OLS) estimates of??~ in equation (3) will be biased toward a 
     
finding of "flight" if low-skilled Hispanics chose to settle in districts that non-Hispanic 

households with children were already departing. 23 They will be biased against such a finding, 

on the other hand, if both groups were attracted to the same places. Measurement error in ?kd 

will also lead to attenuation bias. We confront these potential biases using a two stage least 

squares (TSLS) approach. Our instrument for ?kd is constructed in two steps using data from 

multiple sources. 

      The first step is to generate a prediction of the change in the number of low-English 
     
Hispanic students enrolled in a district's public schools over 1976 to 2000, given Mexican 

immigration over the period and initial patterns of Mexican settlement. This prediction is given 

by: 



(4) 


?K d?? M 1970 M 1970????K 1976?2000 , 

ˆ

?

d

?


where M 1970 M 1970 is the share of the California Mexican-born population (of all ages) residing d

in district d in 1970 (from the 1970 SDT), and??K 1976?2000 represents the number of low-English 

Hispanic children enrolled in California public schools (grades K to 12) in 2000 who were either 

born in Mexico or born in the U.S. to at least one Mexican-born parent (or if both parents are 

foreign-born, to a Mexican-born mother) who arrived in the U.S. in 1976 or later. 24 The latter 








23 
24 








Purely mechanically, departures of non-Hispanic children will also inflate ?kd. 
Table A1, Panel A lists the top ten districts in our sample ranked by the share of California's Mexicans residing in 

the district in 1970. Los Angeles Unified alone was home to over 28 percent of California's Mexicans in 1970. 
                                      11 
                                      
statistic was computed using the 2000 Census (Ruggles, et al. 2010). We define as "low- 

English" children who are not fluent in English.25 

      In the second step, we obtain the instrument itself, Zd, which gives the predicted change 
      
     
in ?kd under the assumption that??K d represents the only source of enrollment change: ˆ



(5) 



Z d?? K 1976????K d 

???

d

ˆ

???Enr 

1976 
d

???K d?? K 1976 Enrd1976 . ˆ

?????

d

?



K 1976 and Enrd1976 represent the initial (1976) enrollment of low-English Hispanics and total d

enrollment, respectively, in district d. The second component of Zd is thus the initial share low- 

English Hispanic in the district, while the first represents what that share would have been in 

2000 had nothing else changed. A first stage coefficient on Zd of one would be expected if, on 

average, the settlement patterns of Mexican immigrants in California had not changed since 

1970, and enrollments were otherwise changing little. 

      The instrument's power thus derives from the tendency of new immigrants to settle in 
     
existing Mexican communities. Its validity hinges on the size of these existing Mexican 

communities being unrelated to other future changes in a district's desirability for non-Hispanic 

families with children. As described above, we assess this assumption in multiple ways, testing 

whether Zd is uncorrelated with relative population flows of non-Hispanic children over the 

1960s - before the big wave of Mexican immigration - or with other district characteristics 

observed in the early 1970s that may predict whether a district will later become less (or more) 

attractive for non-Hispanic children. For example, a series of California Supreme Court 

decisions in the 1970s led to an equalization of school funding across California school districts, 






25 






This definition produces low-English Hispanic shares similar across the two data sources. Our TSLS estimates 

are, however, not sensitive to this definition. This is to be expected given that ?K 1976-2000 depends in no way on the district. For the same reason, using 1976 data to estimate a true change in the number of low-English Mexicans has no impact on our estimates. Further, defining M1970 and ?K 1976-2000 using data on Mexican immigration to the entire U.S. rather than California only has little effect on the results. 
                                      12 
                                      
which may have made initially low-spending districts more attractive over the period we study.26 

We capture the possible intensity of this effect with district property tax revenues and 

expenditures per pupil prior to these court decisions using data from the 1972 Census of 

Governments (Bureau of the Census 1972). Information on a number of other district 

characteristics used to evaluate our identification strategy is drawn from various historical 

sources described in Online Appendix A. 

III.C. Estimation Sample 

      We restrict our analysis to California's 23 metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs), by their 
     
1990 definition. We define "districts" to serve all grade levels and to have constant boundaries 

between 1970 and 2000 and aggregate key variables accordingly. School districts occasionally 

reorganize, and we want to ensure that we follow consistent geographic units over time.27 

Including both secondary districts (which operate high schools) and elementary districts (which 

operate primary and middle schools) would be redundant, as elementary districts feed secondary 

districts and thus cover an overlapping geographic area. We focus on secondary district 

boundaries, since secondary districts represent elementary districts that are not directly observed 

in the 1970 SDT due to their small size (see Online Appendix A). In our main sample, there are 

a total of 50 combined elementary-secondary districts and 179 unified districts, for a total of 229 

observations.28 

III. 	Exploratory Analysis 

A. 	Descriptive Statistics 





26 





School finance equalization led to increases in private school enrollment (Thomas A. Downes and David 

Schoeman 1998) and affected the income heterogeneity of populations within districts (Daniel Aaronson 1999). See Eric J. Brunner and Jon Sonstelie (2006) for a discussion of school finance in California. 
27 For example, if districts A and B in 1970 merge to form C by 2000, we aggregate A and B to create an observation for C in 1970. See Online Appendix A for details. 
28 There are 295 total secondary district boundaries (after accounting for reorganizations) in the 23 California 
metropolitan areas under observation. We lose 45 of these boundaries because they are not represented in the 1970 SDT due to their small size, and another 21 boundaries primarily due to poor data quality in the OCR data. 
                                      13 
                                      
       Table 1 shows summary statistics for our estimation sample. Panel A gives statistics on 
     
the key variables in our analysis. The low-English Hispanic public school enrollment share on 

average rose a substantial 10.9 percentage points between 1976 and 2000, up from 2.5 percent in 

1976. The standard deviation on this variable is also 10 percentage points, suggesting substantial 

variation across districts. The instrument is in a similar range, with a mean of 0.075, and a 

standard deviation of 0.07. The components of the main outcome - changes in the proportions of 

an MSA's non-Hispanic children and adults of parenting age residing in a district - are on 

average close to zero. This is expected by definition; deviations from zero come about because 

district coverage in our sample is incomplete. We also explore changes in non-Hispanic private 

school enrollment below. The private school enrollment rate of non-Hispanics, also calculated 

using the SDT, rose by a considerable 9.8 percentage points between 1970 and 2000, a seven- 

fold increase over its 1970 level of 1.4 percent (Panel B). This change could be a consequence 

of school finance equalization or other factors, not necessarily a consequence of changes in 

school demographics stemming from immigration. Equalization is a potential confounder that 

we hope to rule out through our identification strategy. 

                         [Table 1 about here] 
                     
      Descriptive statistics on control variables, including per-pupil expenditures and property 
     
tax revenues, are shown in Panel C. The average district in our sample enrolled about 14,754 

students in 1976 and raised $640 per-pupil in revenues through the property tax and spent $1,087 

per student in 1971-72, with a standard deviation of around $300 in each. About 10 percent of 

districts in our sample are in center cities. The typical district's non-Hispanics had a dropout rate 

of 7.8 percent at ages 16 to 17 and a median family income of $9,760 in 1970.29 

B. 	Evaluating the Identification Strategy 



29 



Because the data are on the income distribution are given only as family counts in income bins (e.g., $10,000- 

12,000), the median income estimates actually represent a lower bound. For example, if the median income in a district is found to be in the $10,000-$12,000 range, it is recorded as $10,000. 
                                      14 
                                      
       Our identification strategy relies on the assumptions that the instrument is related to 
     
changes in the actual presence of low-English Hispanics in a district's public schools, but is 

unrelated to other factors that might have differentially pushed out non-Hispanic households with 

children (like a loss in the district's fiscal autonomy as a result of school finance equalization) or 

attracted them (like a low cost of living). It is useful to begin by examining the credibility of 

these assumptions. 

      Panel A of Table 2 speaks to the former, showing that there is a strong first-stage 
     
relationship between the instrument and the change in a district's low-English Hispanic 

enrollment share in our baseline specification, which includes fixed effects for MSA by district 

type.30 Figure 2 shows this relationship graphically. The first-stage coefficient is statistically 

distinguishable from zero, at the one percent level, but also significantly less than one. This 

deviation from one largely arises because the instrument is constructed as if the arrival of low- 

English Hispanics was the only source of enrollment change in the district. Since enrollment 

was actually growing for other reasons - 33 percent in the average district in our sample - the 

instrument predicts changes in low-English Hispanic share that are systematically too large 

(undiluted by other growth).31 

[Figure 2 about here] 

[Table 2 about here] 

      To explore the second identifying assumption, the remainder of Table 2 shows slope 
     
estimates from comparable reduced-form regressions of many potential correlates of outcomes 

on the instrument. Non-Hispanic median family income in 1970 is significantly lower, by about 


30 



These effects account for the fact that districts are sometimes missing from the sample, so that district shares of 

the MSA non-Hispanic population do not always sum to one within MSA. Nearly 80 percent of the variation in Zd 
in our sample is within metropolitan areas. Standard errors are clustered on metropolitan area, as noted above, and t- 
statistics are compared to critical values in a t-distribution with 21 degrees of freedom (the number of clusters less two, a rule of thumb explored in A. Colin Cameron, Jonah B. Gelbach, and Douglas L. Miller 2008). 
31 To confirm this, we also created a version of the instrument that factors in this 33 percent growth from other 
sources, and found it makes the first stage coefficient close to one. This alternative version does not systematically affect our TSLS results. 
                                      15 
                                      
$600 for a one standard deviation increase in the instrument (=0.07) (Panel C). This relationship 

arises because, unsurprisingly, the very highest income districts (like Beverly Hills) have very 

few Mexicans in 1970. For example, if we drop the top income quartile of districts from the 

sample, the relationship disappears.32 In addition, we show below that this correlation, if 

anything, works against finding relocation of non-Hispanic children in response to immigration. 

      Importantly, however, the instrument is not related to the pre-existing (1970) location 
     
decisions of non-Hispanic parents, or to non-Hispanic private school enrollment rates, as shown 

in Panel B. It also unrelated to prior trends in relative population movements of children, shown 

in a separate table below. 33 Further, it is also uncorrelated with many initial district 

characteristics that might have especial bearing on the future location decisions of non-Hispanic 

parents. Relationships between the instrument and the initial school finance variables, for 

example, are statistically insignificant and small, amounting to only about $10 differences in per- 

pupil property tax revenues and per-pupil expenditures for a one standard deviation change in the 

instrument. This is reassuring since school finance equalization may have made initially low 

revenue districts more attractive to families with children over this period, as discussed. The 

instrument is also not significantly correlated with the district's 1971-72 pupil-teacher ratio, with 

the dropout rate of non-Hispanic 16-17 year olds in 1970, or with initial enrollment in logs and 

levels (not shown) and center city status.34 It is also not correlated with the density of public 

schools within district, captured with a dummy for having an above average number of schools 

(in 1972) given 1976 enrollment and land area.35 





32 
33 





These results are not shown, but are available on request from the authors. 
We cannot perform a similar exercise for the private school enrollment rate due to lack of sufficient data for 1960. 

34 Related, Table A1 shows that the largest districts in our sample are not those with the largest predicted increases 

in low-English Hispanic share. 
35 This could also be interpreted as showing that the instrument is uncorrelated the median voter's preferences for 
segregation. We arrive at this prediction by regressing the natural log number of schools on the natural log in 
enrollment, the natural log of land area, their interaction, and all of the other pre-existing district characteristics 
listed in Table 1, Panel C and classifying as "high choice" those with non-negative residuals. We explored 
                                      16 
                                      
IV. 	Choice of School District 

A. 	Reduced-Form Estimates by Age Group 

      To make our estimation strategy transparent, we begin the presentation of our findings by 
     
decomposing the reduced-form specification of model (3) into its constituent parts - separate 

estimates of the relationship between the instrument and the changes in the proportions of non- 

Hispanic children and non-Hispanic adults of parenting age who reside in a district. We do this 

in the first two columns of Table 3, again conditioning on metropolitan area by district type fixed 

effects. The difference between these estimates, presented in column (3), is the reduced-form of 

the model of interest. 

                         [Table 3 about here] 
                     
      Panel A presents these estimates for the full sample. The instrument is negatively related 
     
to the 1970 to 2000 change in the proportion of an MSA's non-Hispanic children residing in a 

district: the coefficient in column (1) is -0.077. However, the coefficient is -0.033 in the same 

regression for non-Hispanic adults of parenting age (column (2)). The difference in these 

coefficients, -0.044 (column (3)), implies, for every standard deviation increase in the 

instrument, the proportion of an MSA's non-Hispanic children residing in a district fell by 0.30 

percentage points more than the proportion of an MSA's non-Hispanic parenting age adults. 

This is a lower bound on the loss of non-Hispanic households with children due to changing 

school demographics, since many adults in the comparison group have children. 

                         [Figure 3 about here] 
                    
      Figure 3 is a graphical representation of the regression in column (3). With the exception 
     
of large districts like Los Angeles Unified, San Francisco Unified, and San Diego Unified - 

which naturally account for larger shares of their respective MSA's non-Hispanics at baseline - 



alternative regression models (e.g., in levels, not logs), as well as considered schools per square mile and schools per child enrolled. All yielded insignificant relationships with the instrument. 
                                      17 
                                      
districts are tightly clustered around the downward sloping line. Below, we show that our 

findings continue to hold when large center city school districts are dropped from the sample - 

which is not surprising given that the instrument is uncorrelated with district enrollment and 

center city status (Table 2) - and under alternative specifications of the dependent variable that 

are less sensitive to scale. We also present the TSLS estimate that corresponds to this reduced- 

form model, explore the sensitivity of this model to inclusion of controls, and discuss ways to 

interpret the magnitude of the estimate. 

      The remainder of Table 3 presents a falsification exercise which complements Table 2. 
     
Here, we test whether there was an "effect" of predicted changes in future school demographics 

on relocation in the 1960s - prior to the big wave of Mexican immigration, but when a district 

may already have been in decline.36 If there were, it would suggest that "outflows" of non- 

Hispanic children were driven not by increases in the low-English Hispanic enrollment share, but 

some other correlated factor. Limiting the sample to the 13 MSAs observable in 1960 (see 

Online Appendix A), the 1970 to 2000 finding is still negative, significant, and similar to that 

found for the full sample, at -0.054 (Panel B, column (3)). 

                         [Figure 4 about here] 
                    
      The final panel shows the findings from the falsification exercise; Figure 4 shows scatter 
     
plots that correspond to this model (Panel B) and its 1970 to 2000 counterpart for the restricted 

sample (Panel A). The estimate is imprecise, but there is little evidence to suggest that the greater 

loss of children between 1970 and 2000 in districts with larger values of the instrument was a 

continuation of a prior trend: the coefficient in column (3) is -0.008 and is not statistically 

significant. Even when we multiply this coefficient by three to extrapolate to a change over a 30 

year period (italicized figures below coefficients in Panel C), it remains less than half of the 




36It 




would perhaps be ideal to also estimate the pre-trend over a thirty year period, 1940 to 1970, but the data do not 

exist to do this. Nor can we show our outcome for just 1970 to 1980, since the 1980 SDT is inadequate. 
                                      18 
                                      
magnitude of the effect we estimate between 1970 and 2000. Furthermore, one might expect at 

least some negative relationship during the 1960s, as there were Mexican inflows in that decade 

as well (Figure 1).37 Although the estimates for the 1960s are noisy, it is reassuring that a 

significant negative relationship between the instrument and relative loss of children from a 

district appears limited to the period in which Mexicans were arriving in California in large 

numbers. 

B. 	Main Findings 

      Table 4 shows our main results - TSLS (Panel A) and OLS (Panel B) estimates of model 
     
(3). The TSLS estimate in column (1) corresponds to the reduced form estimate in column (3) of 

Table 3, Panel A, and is thus based on a specification that includes fixed effects for MSA by 

district type. The statistically significant point estimate of -0.0612 implies that a 10 percentage 

point increase in the low-English Hispanic enrollment share induced 0.612 percent of an MSA's 

non-Hispanic children to locate elsewhere, or about 7.8 percent (0.612/7.8) of non-Hispanic 

children in a district of average size initially. 

                         [Table 4 about here] 
                     
      Table 2 showed that the instrument was correlated with a district's initial non-Hispanic 
     
median family income. If lower income districts were in decline for other reasons, the estimate 

in column (1) would overstate the magnitude of non-Hispanic "flight" in response to changing 

school demographics. In fact, the opposite is the case. A control for median income, added in 

column (2), makes the estimated coefficient larger in magnitude. Rather than declining, the 

relative proportion of non-Hispanic children was rising faster in initially lower income districts. 






37 






In fact, the ratio of the reduced-form estimate on the instrument in for the 1960s (Panel C, column (3)) to the 

implied reduced-form estimate over all of 1960-2000 (0.13=-0.008/(-0.008-0.054)) is only slightly larger than the 
fraction of total 1960-2000 growth in the Mexican child share in California that occurred during the 1960s (0.089=0.0203/0.227, using figures underlying Figure I). 
                                      19 
                                      
       As anticipated by the lack of correlation with other variables found in Table 2, the TSLS 
     
estimate changes little with the addition of controls for the further initial district characteristics 

listed in Table 1, Panel C (column (3)) and for the initial (1970) level of the dependent variable 

(column (4)). 	By contrast, OLS estimates fall in magnitude with the addition of these controls 

(Panel B). The OLS estimates are also considerably smaller in magnitude than TSLS at the 

outset (-0.0202 in column (1)) and not statistically significant in subsequent specifications. The 

OLS estimates may be attenuated by measurement error or by the fact that other forces (e.g., cost 

of new homes) led non-Hispanic and Hispanic families alike to spread out in similar directions. 

Using an instrumental variable with similar motivations to that used here, for example, Saiz and 

Wachter (2011) obtain OLS estimates that are positive and TSLS estimates that are negative 

when examining the response of native and white non-Hispanic population to changes in the 

foreign-born population at the tract level in the entire U.S., and provide evidence that the 

common movement of both groups to newly developing tracts contributed to the OLS estimates 

being positive. 

      We present estimates for different subsamples in the remaining columns. Column (5) 
     
drops center city districts from the sample. The TSLS point estimate is slightly smaller than that 

in column (1), but remains highly significant, confirming that our main estimates are not driven 

by the sensitivity of the outcome measure to district size, or by non-Hispanic families with 

children moving out of center cities. The final column shows the estimate for unified districts 

alone, which are statistically indistinguishable from the full-sample estimates. 

      As Section II described, these coefficients understate the loss of households with non- 
     
Hispanic children as a result of changes in school demographics, because many in the 

comparison group have children. So we also convert our estimates to a household "displacement 

rate," that is, the change in the number of non-Hispanic households for each household enrolling 


                                      20 
                                      
a low-English Hispanic student in the public schools. This informs our interpretation of the 

estimates. In particular, one might expect some displacement if the supply of housing did not 

fully expand to accommodate the new arrivals. 38 However, a household displacement rate larger 

than one suggests that crowding in the housing market alone cannot account for our estimates 

(Boustan 2010). 

      Household displacement rates are shown beneath the TSLS estimates in Table 4. They 
     
are computed for a district of the average initial size (in the specified subpopulation) and given 

average fertility and public school enrollment rates of non-Hispanics and low-English Hispanic 

households. To illustrate, it is useful to walk through calculation of the displacement rate in 

column (1). In a district of average initial size, it would have required about 1,679 additional 

low-English Hispanics to increase their enrollment share by 10 percentage points.39 Since the 

average household that enrolls low-English Hispanic students in the public schools enrolls 1.629 

of them, this is equivalent to the arrival of 1,679/1.629 = 1,031 low-English Hispanic 

households.40 As we calculated above, this 10 percentage point increase in low-English Hispanic 

share led to a 7.8 percent reduction in the population of non-Hispanic children relative to adults, 

or a loss of 1,429 households with non-Hispanic children in a district of the average initial size.41 

Overall, then, the TSLS coefficient implies a displacement rate of 1.4 (=1,429/1,031), meaning 



38 



In the framework presented in Section I, we assumed one housing market, which returns to equilibrium when p 

adjusts sufficiently to restore (1) for both household types. If instead Mexican immigrants and non-Hispanic 
households with children tend to compete for the same types of houses (e.g., detached single-family residences), 
immigration may raise house prices more for type 1 households, prompting greater losses of non-Hispanic 
households with children even absent reductions in demand for public education. In the extreme with zero supply 
elasticity, such "crowding" would lead each low-English Hispanic household to displace one non-Hispanic household without even affecting demand for public schools. 
39 The average district in our sample had 14,754 students in 1976 (Table 1), 315 (about 2 percent) of whom were 
low-English Hispanics. To raise the low-English Hispanic share by 10 percentage points, to 12 percent, required the 

addition of about 1,679 low-English Hispanic students, since (315 + 1,679)/(14,754 + 1,679) ? 0.12. 
40 The 1.629 figure was computed for California using the 2000 Census of Population (Ruggles et al. 2010). The 
typical Hispanic household has more than 1.629 children, but not all are low-English and not all are enrolled in 

public schools. 
41 To convert this to a loss of households with kids, we first scale the 0.078 upward by dividing by (1-0.5467), where 0.5467 is the fraction of 20 to 49 year old California non-Hispanics who have children in the 2000 Census (Ruggles et al. 2010). See Online Appendix B for derivation of this conversion. This calculation also uses that, according to the 1970 SDT, there were 8,306 non-Hispanic households with kids in the average sample in our district. 
                                      21 
                                      
that 14 non-Hispanic households located elsewhere for every 10 additional households enrolling 

low-English Hispanic students in the district. 

      The displacement rates presented in the other columns are all also larger than one, 
     
including column (5), which excludes center city districts. So an inelastic supply of housing by 

itself cannot account for the negative relationship between low-English Hispanic enrollments and 

the relative size of the non-Hispanic child population in the typical district. On top of this, some 

households without children may respond to changes in low-English Hispanic share in schools as 

if they did, because they anticipate having kids in the future. As a result, these displacement 

rates may be conservative. To get a sense of the importance of this, note that our displacement 

rates are proportional to (1-?)-1, where?? is the fraction of adults who have kids or act as if they 

do. We use for?? the actual fraction of California non-Hispanic 20 to 49 year-olds with children 

in the 2000 Census (Ruggles et al. 2010), or 0.55. If instead we used?? = 0.6, the displacement 

rates in Table 4 would rise by 12.5 percent = (1-0.55)/(1-0.6).42 

C. 	Additional Sensitivity Analysis 

                               [Table 5 about here] 
                          
      Table 5 examines various alternative formulations of the dependent variable. To make 
     
the estimates comparable across specifications, each TSLS estimate is also again converted to a 

household displacement rate. 

      Row (a) of Panel A repeats the TSLS and OLS estimates that appeared in column (1) of 
     
the previous table, and repeats the implied displacement rate in column (3). Row (b) replaces the 

district's share of the MSA's non-Hispanic population, sd,m?? N d,m N m , with the logit 





42 





Our calculations already include households with children too young to be in school, which we hope captures 

many of these anticipated moves. An anonymous referee suggested we use?? = fraction of all non-Hispanic 
households who ever had children or who will in the future. According to the 1990 Census of Population (Ruggles 
et al. 2010) about 80 percent of non-Hispanic women in California have had a child by age 50. If?? = 0.8, it would 
roughly double the displacement rates. 
                                      22 
                                      

transformation, ln?sd,m??1? sd,m???. Logit is an attractive specification here, since the distribution 

of district size is right skewed.43 Both OLS and TSLS estimates are statistically significant in 

this specification, and the marginal effect, evaluated for a district of average initial size 

(coefficient*0.078*(1-0.078)), is larger than was estimated in the linear model. So is the 

corresponding displacement rate. We also see the same pattern: TSLS exceeds OLS in 

magnitude, and OLS is more sensitive to controls (not shown). 

      We also estimate these two models weighted by the district's 1970 population of non- 
     
Hispanic children in Panel B. Weighting provides insight into whether the effects of changing 

school demographics for the typical non-Hispanic of school age differ from those for the typical 

district. In the main specification (row (a)), the weighted TSLS coefficient is larger than the 

unweighted TSLS coefficient. The weighted TSLS logit coefficient in Panel B (row (b)) is a bit 

smaller than its unweighted counterpart in Panel A, though the marginal effect, evaluated at the 

weighted mean, is larger. When evaluated as a displacement rate, both weighted estimates are 

very similar in magnitude to the unweighted linear estimate in Panel A. 

      Returning to the bottom two rows of Panel A, we present (unweighted) estimates for 
     
dependent variables that may be easier to interpret. In TSLS, a 10 percentage point increase in 

the low-English Hispanic share in enrollment is associated with an 12 percentage point decline in 

the relative population growth rate of non-Hispanic children (row (c)). This is similar to 

estimates of "white flight" after school desegregation. Using a similar growth rate specification, 

for example, Baum-Snow and Lutz (forthcoming) find that court orders to desegregate center 

city districts in the 1960s and 1970s on average led to an increase in white exposure to black 

peers of 0.09 and declines in white enrollment and population of 12 percent and 6 percent, 






43 







This specification would be appropriate if the household-level model underlying district choice were logit. 
                                    23 
                                    
                                    
respectively. 44 This supports that demand for public schools underlies our findings, a point to 

which we return below. TSLS estimates also imply that a 10 percentage point increase in low- 

English Hispanic enrollment share is associated with a 2.8 percentage point decline in the child 

share of the non-Hispanic population under 50 (row (d)). 

V. 	Private Schools 

      Our estimates imply that the location decisions of non-Hispanic households with children 
     
are relatively sensitive to changes in school demographics associated with Mexican immigration. 

But can we infer that this finding reflects a reduction in non-Hispanic demand for public 

schools? As described above, the answer is "yes" if the comparison group values changes in 

other district attributes the same as families with children. Non-Hispanics under age 50 appear 

similar on many dimensions regardless of whether they have children in the household, as noted 

above. But it is useful to try to rule out competing hypotheses on other grounds. 

      Unlike decisions about where to live, for example, the decision to attend private school 
     
should be driven only by the characteristics of public schools themselves. Exploring the effect of 

rising low-English Hispanic enrollment shares on the non-Hispanic private school enrollment 

rate can therefore provide direct, complementary evidence that changes in school demographics 

associated with low-skilled Hispanic immigration reduced non-Hispanic demand for public 

schools. 

                         [Table 6 about here] 
                     
      Table 6 presents TSLS and OLS estimates of the effect of the change in low-English 
     
Hispanic enrollment share on the 1970 to 2000 change in the non-Hispanic private school 

enrollment rate of district residents; as above, the baseline model controls for MSA by district 

type fixed effects. Both the TSLS estimates (Panel A) and OLS estimates (Panel B) are positive. 



44 



See also Reber (2005). A 10 percentage point increase in low-English Hispanic share will lead to a 10 percentage 

point increase in the exposure of non-Hispanics to low-English Hispanics if there is no sorting response within the district. 
                                      24 
                                      
The TSLS coefficient of roughly 0.18 (column (1)) implies that a 10 percentage point increase in 

the low-English Hispanic share in public school enrollment prompted about 1.8 percent of a 

district's non-Hispanic children to enroll in private school.45 This estimate suggests that rising 

low-English Hispanic enrollments can account for about 20 percent of the 9.8 percentage point 

increase in California's non-Hispanic private school enrollment rate over 1970 to 2000. Controls 

do not diminish the magnitude of this estimate, though they do make it less precise. 

VI. 	Conclusion 

      This paper has examined whether increases in low-English Hispanic school enrollment 
     
have lowered the relative proportion of non-Hispanic households with children choosing to 

reside in metropolitan California school districts between 1970 and 2000, a period in which the 

low-English Hispanic presence increased tremendously in the state as a whole. Our empirical 

approach accounts for endogeneity of school demographics using 1970 settlement patterns of 

Mexican immigrants and uses a comparison group to account for the broader effects of 

immigration on communities. Supporting the credibility of our research design, districts 

predicted on the basis of 1970 Mexican settlement to receive more low-English Hispanics in 

their schools in future years were not already losing relatively more non-Hispanic children in the 

1960s and were initially comparable to other districts along many observable dimensions that 

should matter for parents. 

      We find that districts with larger increases in their low-English Hispanic enrollment 
     
shares saw greater relative reductions in the rate of settlement of non-Hispanic children between 

1970 and 2000. These effects are too large to be accounted for by an inelastic housing supply, 

and districts with larger increases in low-English Hispanic shares saw larger increases in their 

non-Hispanic private school enrollment rates over 1970 to 2000 as well, providing 



45 



This response is close to the effect that Betts and Fairlie (2003) found at the MSA level for secondary students - 

that two natives enroll in private school for every 10 immigrant arrivals. Our study differs from theirs in several ways beyond the unit of observation, so this comparison should be made cautiously. 
                                      25 
                                      
complementary evidence of reductions in non-Hispanic demand for public education as a result 

of immigration. Our approach nevertheless leaves open the question of whether there have in 

fact been real negative spillovers from immigration for native students.46 Reductions in non- 

Hispanic demand for public schools may simply reflect distaste for diversity. 

      Regardless of the mechanism, our findings suggest that the native sorting may leave 
     
immigrant children especially isolated, with potential long-run and intergenerational 

consequences. More generally, our findings suggest that public services may be an important 

determinant of the residential choices of natives in response to immigration, and in turn, the 

residential isolation of immigrants. Existing research on the residential isolation of immigrants 

has had little comment on the role of local public goods in shaping residential decisions, and, for 

that matter, there has not been much research on the effects of immigration on public goods at 

all.47 This is a fruitful area for future research. 

