Elizabeth_Cascio
Economics
Is_Being_in_School_Better?

Financial support from the USDA through the RIDGE Grant Program and the Robert Wood Johnson
Foundation's Healthy Eating Research Program (Award #57922) is gratefully acknowledged. We
also thank Kosali Simon, Tom DeLeire and seminar participants at Indiana University for helpful comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
NBER publications.


                                              ABSTRACT

In this paper, we investigate the impact of attending school on body weight and obesity. We use school
starting age cutoff dates to compare weight outcomes for similar age children with different years
of school exposure. As is the case with academic outcomes, school exposure is related to unobserved
determinants of weight outcomes because some families choose to have their child start school late
(or early). If one does not account for this endogeneity, it appears that an additional year of school
exposure results in a greater BMI and a higher probability of being overweight or obese. When actual
exposure is instrumented with expected exposure based on school starting dates and birthday, the significant
positive effects disappear, and most point estimates become negative and insignificant. However,
for children not eating the school lunch, there is a significant negative effect on the probability of being
overweight.



Patricia M. Anderson                                  Elizabeth U. Cascio
Department of Economics                               Department of Economics
Dartmouth College                                     Dartmouth College
6106 Rockefeller                                      6106 Rockefeller Hall
Hanover, NH 03755-3514                                Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER                                              and NBER
patricia.m.anderson@dartmouth.edu                     elizabeth.u.cascio@dartmouth.edu

Kristin F. Butcher                                    Diane Whitmore Schanzenbach
Department of Economics                               School of Education and Social Policy
Wellesley College                                     Northwestern University
106 Central Street                                    Annenberg Hall, Room 205
Wellesley, MA 02481                                   2120 Campus Drive
and NBER                                              Evanston, IL 60208
kbutcher@wellesley.edu                                and NBER
                                                      dws@northwestern.edu

I. Introduction

        In recent decades, there has been a stark increase in childhood obesity, with rates tripling

from 5% in the early 1970s to 15% by the early 2000s. This increase in childhood obesity raises

many concerns. For example, Type II diabetes is occurring at younger ages. In fact, we can no

longer refer to juvenile diabetes and adult-onset diabetes, but instead use the terms Type I and

Type II. In addition to health concerns, overweight children have been found to have lower

quality-of-life scores, and there is some evidence that they may have worse academic outcomes

(see Taras and Potts-Datema (2005) for a review of this literature). These concerns about

childhood obesity have led to many studies, but to this point there is no "smoking gun" that

clearly explains a majority of the increase. Given that children spend a large amount of time in

school, many studies have focused on the school environment.

        For example, Schanzenbach (2009) concludes that regularly eating school lunch (as

opposed to bringing a lunch from home) increases obesity rates by about 2 percentage points.

Similarly, Anderson and Butcher (2006) find that a 10 percentage point increase in the likelihood

of being exposed to junk food in school results in a 1 percent increase in the average student's

BMI. While these studies are consistent with school attendance being deleterious for one's

health, it is important to realize that they do not necessarily imply that this is the case. Rather,

they both indicate that some school environments are worse than others ­ that is, schools with

higher quality lunches and less junk food would produce leaner children than those with lower

quality lunches and more junk food. It may still be the case, though, that being in school is better

than being out of school. Von Hippel et al. (2007) try to directly address this question, by

comparing weight gain in the summer to weight gain during the school year. They conclude that




                                                                                                 1

the rate of weight gain is faster during the summer, although there are many caveats to their

findings, including issues of seasonality.

        A straightforward way to think about the impact of being in school versus not being in

school takes advantage of school starting age cutoffs, an approach that has previously been used

to estimate the effect of educational attainment on test scores (Gormley and Gayer, 2005; Cascio

and Lewis, 2006), adult well-being (Dobkin and Ferreira, 2010), and birth outcomes (McCrary

and Royer, forthcoming). Consider a state that requires that a child reach age 5 by September 1

in order to start kindergarten that fall. A child born on August 31 will start kindergarten at the

age of five years and one day and be in school for the next year, while one born on September 2

will have to wait until the following year to begin kindergarten and will be aged 5 years and 364

days on entry. The only difference between these similar-age children is being born one day

before or after September 1. Ideally, we would want to compare these children at the end of the

year where one is in school and the other is not. However, since the slightly older child will

always have one additional year of school exposure for a given age, later comparisons should

also be informative. Much later comparisons, however, may begin to conflate any positive effect

of education on health with a pure school exposure effect. Zhang (2007) uses school starting
                                                                    1



age laws in combination with the NLSY97 to determine that teenage girls with more education

are less likely to be overweight, a finding she attributes to the possibility that education promotes

healthier eating habits.

        In this study, we estimate the reduced-form impact of being in school on children's body

weight. We start by using data from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study ­ Kindergarten

cohort of 1998 (ECLS-K) to compare the weights of children who have one versus two years of

school exposure. We first show that a simple ordinary least squares (OLS) approach is

1See Cutler and Lleras-Muney (2010) for a recent discussion of the education gradient in health.


                                                                                                    2

misleading. We then move to an instrumental variables approach that exploits the regression

discontinuity in school exposure in birthday around school entry cutoff dates, described above.

Using this approach, we find no strong evidence that an additional year of schooling has either

positive or negative effects on weight outcomes, although there are some indications that school

may be beneficial if one avoids eating the school lunch. We then supplement the ECLS-K

results with some estimates using the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth Mother-Child

matched data (NLSY79).




II. Empirical Approach

        The fact that most states set a date by which children should be five years old in order to

start kindergarten implies that some six year olds will be in first grade, while others will be in

kindergarten. Consider, for example, a state with a September 1 cutoff. A child born on

September 2 will miss the cutoff and be six at the beginning of kindergarten the following year

(an "older starter"). By comparison, a child born just a day earlier who was allowed to start

kindergarten (a "younger starter") will be in first grade when she is six. Thus, we have two

children with almost identical ages, one of whom (the younger starter) has been exposed to

school for an additional year. If, in fact, being in school improves weight outcomes, as implied

by von Hippel et al. (2007) and Zhang (2007), then the younger starters should have a healthier

weight for their age than the older starters. If, instead, the younger starters have a less healthy

weight for their age than the older starters, then we can conclude that not only are some school

environments worse than others (as in Anderson and Butcher (2006) and Schanzenbach (2009)),

but that any school can be bad for weight outcomes.




                                                                                                 3

         If everyone complied with the school starting age dates set by the states, a simple

regression of weight outcomes on current grade, controlling for age, would replicate the thought

experiment described above. One would indeed be comparing the six year old born September 2

and now in kindergarten with the six year old born August 31 and now in first grade. However,

many schools do not strictly enforce the state cutoffs, and will allow the September 2 child to go

ahead and start if the family requests it. More importantly, the entry cutoffs, even if strictly

enforced, are only eligibility cutoffs in many states. Thus, while a child turning age five on

August 31 is eligible to start kindergarten, there may be no requirement that he start. Typically,

school attendance requirements only apply to an older age (as part of truancy laws). For

example, a state with a September 1 cutoff makes a child who is five on September 1 eligible for

kindergarten, but the child may not be required to be in school until they are six (or even seven if

the state does not require kindergarten) on September 1. As a result, actual grade is determined
                                                                 2



not just by the state legislation, but also by parents' decisions.

         Over the past several decades, the trend has been to send children to kindergarten at older

ages. Deming and Dynarksi (2008) show that much of this trend is explained not by the
     3



increases in legal minimum age at school entry that have been implemented in many states, but

rather by parental decisions to hold back children who are eligible to start kindergarten. This

practice of "red-shirting" is seen more often among groups with higher socioeconomic status,

and is especially common for boys. Given that boys are typically thought to mature socially a bit

later, their being more likely to be held back is probably not surprising. However, the higher

red-shirting rates for more advantaged groups are perhaps more so, given that their children

should be the most ready for formal schooling. Anecdotally, parents are concerned that their



2See http://www.fcps.edu/start/kindergarten.htm for an example of just such a rule.
3All of the facts in this paragraph are based on Deming and Dynarski (2008)


                                                                                                4

child not be the youngest in the cohort, believing that an older child will have a competitive

edge.  4



         From the perspective of our paper, it will be interesting to see if physical maturity

influences the parental decision of when to start a child in school. In particular, if children with
                                                                                   5



lower body weight are considered less "ready" for kindergarten and held back, a simple ordinary

least squares regression of weight on current grade, controlling for age, will make it appear that

school exposure increases weight. To avoid bias from the endogenous choice of school starting

age, we will implement what is essentially a regression discontinuity (RD) approach.

         Consider the following model:

         Yi = f(agei, Xi, school exposurei),

Where Y is a measure of body weight, and X is a set of demographics, such as race, gender and

parental characteristics. This simple model, when estimated via OLS (and using actual grade as

the measure of school exposure) would be expected to be biased by the endogeneity of the school

starting decision. This is this version of the model that we start with, in order to investigate the

role of parental decision-making. We then move to an RD specification, using a dummy variable

for "making the cutoff" as the measure of school exposure. Throughout, "making the cutoff"

implies having a birthday that falls either on or in the six months prior to the school entry cutoff

in one's state of residence. Finally, we combine the RD and straightforward regression

approaches by measuring school exposure with actual grade, but using the dummy for making

the cutoff as an instrument.



4It is not clear from the literature that there is any lasting advantage to being relatively older, and there remains the
possibility that by starting older, the minimum drop-out age will apply at lower grades, resulting in less total
education received.
5Physical and emotional maturity may be especially correlated for premature births, as the child's developmental
age may be better measured by "age since conception" and the physical and developmental effects of prematurity
may linger.


                                                                                                                    5

III. Data

        We mainly use data from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study ­ Kindergarten Cohort

of 1998 (ECLS-K) to investigate the impact of school exposure on children's weight. If the data

had been collected on, say, a single birth cohort regardless of the grade attended by the child, it

would be relatively straightforward to implement our RD approach. In such a case, for example,

we would be able to compare a child born on August 31, 1992 to one born on September 2, 1992.

If both children complied with the September 1 school entry-age cutoff rule, and we weighed

them both when they were exactly 6 years and 8 months old (approximately May 1, 1999), then

the August-born child would be in first grade at the time of measurement and the September-

born child would be in kindergarten. Both children have approximately the same age, but the

August-born child has (essentially exogenously) one additional year of schooling. We would

then attribute any difference in weight between the children to the impact of the additional year

of school.

        In practice, though, constructing the comparison is more complicated because the data

follows only a single grade-based cohort. All of the children in the ECLS-K were in

kindergarten in the fall of 1998. The key feature of the data that allows us to construct the RD is

that the children are weighed and measured near the end of both kindergarten and first grade.

Thus, comparing measurements from younger starters in first grade to those from older starters

in kindergarten will successfully compare similar-aged children with different exposure to

school. To continue the example described in the paragraph above (and assuming compliance

with a September 1 age-entry cutoff), in order to be in the 1998-99 kindergarten cohort a

September-born child would be born in 1992, while an August-born child would be born in

1993. When the kindergartners are weighed and measured on May 1, 1999 after nearly 1 year in




                                                                                               6

school, the September-born child is approximately 6 years 8 months old, while the child born on

August 31 is almost a year younger (almost 5 years 8 months old). When they are weighed in

first grade at the end of their second year in school, the September- and August-born children are

approximately aged 7 years 8 months, and 6 years 8 months, respectively. Therefore, in order to

compare the two children at approximately the same age but (exogenously) different years of

school exposure, we would compare the September-born child in measured in kindergarten with

the August-born child in measured in first grade, when each is about 6 years 8 months old.

        Table 1 lists the age distribution at the point in time that the students are weighed and

measured in both kindergarten and first grade. The data are shaded to illustrate how we choose

one measurement per child from the spring kindergarten and spring first grade waves of the

ECLS-K panel to create our final cross-sectional data set. For simplicity, the table and

exposition below use a September 1 cutoff date. In fact, while this is the modal cutoff, there are

14 different cutoff dates employed by the states and we use the cutoff appropriate for each

student's state of residence. In this example, we use the measurement taken when the student's
                               6



age is between 6 years 3 months and 7 years 2 months. Among entry-age compliers, this amounts

to using the kindergarten measurement for those born September ­ February (the "older

starters"), and the first grade measurement for those born March ­ August (the "younger

starters"). Since we measure age relative to the cutoff in days, the September and August

students will be only a few days different in age at the time of observation. More generally, we

use a 12-month range of age centered on the age at the end of kindergarten of the youngest

complier with a state's school entry cutoff.




6We use the 1998 cutoff dates specified in Datar (2004). Thirty eight percent of the children live in states using a
September 1 cutoff and 70 percent are subject to cutoffs in August, September or October.


                                                                                                                7

        There are two types of non-compliers in the ECLS-K kindergarten cohort. First are

students who would have entered kindergarten in the year prior to the ECLS-K cohort, but

delayed entry, so that instead of entering school when they had recently turned five years old,

they delayed until they were six. These students were born between March and August of 1992,

and, in the case of the September 1 cutoff illustrated in Table 1, range between ages 6 years 9

months and 7 years 2 months when they are measured in kindergarten. For these students, we

use the measurement taken in kindergarten. The second type of non-compliance comes from

students who miss the cutoff date but nonetheless start school early before they reach age five.

In the example, these students were born between September 1993 and February 1994, and when

they are measured in first grade are between 6 years and 3 to 8 months old.

        Table 2 illustrates how the sample is arranged to provide one observation per child that is

measured when the child fits into the desired age range, and is assigned an age relative to the

state cutoff for the purposes of implementing the regression discontinuity design. Note that we

limit our sample to the two years of birth dates implied by Table 2. That is, all individuals are
                                                                             7



born in either the 6 months before/after the current year cutoff (the right side of the top panel/left

side of the bottom panel), or the 6 months before/after the previous year cutoff (the right side of

the bottom panel/left side of the top panel).

        If all children complied with the state laws, we would have a sharp discontinuity, and

would simply compare the left-side of the top panel of Table 2 with the right-side. In reality, the

presence of non-compliers makes the discontinuity a fuzzy one. First, there are some younger

starters (the left-side of the bottom panel) who miss the cutoff, but are nonetheless exposed to an

extra year of school. Far more common are the "red-shirts" or older starters (the right-side of the

bottom panel) who make the cutoff, but are not exposed to the extra year of school. The actual

7This uses 97% of the sample, excluding mainly those who delayed starting school by over a year.


                                                                                                   8

relationship between age (relative to cutoff) and years of school exposure is shown in Figure 1.

The dots on the figure are averages of the dependent variable across 7-day bins. Observations to

the right of the cutoff (represented by a vertical line at x=0) are predicted to have more school

exposure. While the discontinuity is clear, it is not as sharp as it would be in a world with only

compliers.

         The maintained assumption in an RD approach like this is that there is no other variable

that changes discretely at the entry cutoff. In Figure 2, we demonstrate that there is no

discontinuity in calendar age measured in days. Our sample selection method has ensured that

calendar age increases smoothly with age relative to the school entry cutoff. As a result, the

children on either side of the entry cutoff are just days apart in age, but have been exposed to

sharply different amounts of school. Adding further credibility to our identification strategy,

there are also no sharp differences at the entry age cutoff along any other background

characteristic (figures available upon request).         8



         We supplement the ECLS-K results using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of

Youth 1979 Mother-Child matched file (NLSY79). The NLSY79 began in 1979 by surveying

12,682 individuals born between 1957 and 1964. Children of the 6,283 female NLSY79

respondents began to be surveyed in 1986 and have been followed up every two years since then.

It is these children who form the base of our NLSY79 sample. Note, however, that the sample


8There is one minor drawback to using the ECLS-K data: we are missing the very small group of students who
deviate from the normal patterns. In particular, to obtain a fully representative sample of children born in August, we
would want to observe three groups of students: those that start on time, those that start a year late (the "red-
shirters"), and the extremely small group (1 student in the ECLS-K) that starts a year early even though that would
make them extremely young relative to their grade cohort. In the ECLS-K data, these groups are born in August
1993, August 1992, and August 1994, respectively. We cannot include any students born in August 1994 because
we do not observe a weight measurement for them during the proper age range (between 6 years 3 months and 7
years 2 months). We have the reverse problem with September-born students. While we observe those who start on
time (born 1992) and those who start early (born 1993), we are forced to omit the 6 students who delay school entry
an extra year even though they would have been among the oldest students in their cohort if they complied with the
entry cutoff (born 1991). To the extent these missing cases are inherently heavier/lighter than average, a small bias
towards OLS will result.


                                                                                                                 9

children are not representative of all children in the United States. In particular, given the

maternal sample, there is an over-representation of children born to young mothers. We

therefore limit our sample to children with mothers who were between the ages of 19 and 40 at

the time of their birth. The NLSY79 also has some problems with data accuracy. In particular,

we exclude observations with recorded BMI outside the range of measured BMI values in the

National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) for the corresponding age

group. We then use two subsamples to supplement the ECLS-K results. First, we use only
       9



children who were age 5 or 6 in the fall of the survey year, to mimic the ECLS-K cohort sample.

Second, we expand the sample to all pre-adolescent children age 5 to 10.

         While the NLSY79 samples do not have the drawback of being a grade-cohort sample

like the ECLS-K, they have their own drawbacks. First, the ratio of individuals reported to be in

a grade higher than predicted (based on their birth date and the school starting date for their

state) relative to those in a grade lower than predicted is higher than one would expect given red-

shirting patterns. Second, the sample is relatively small, limiting statistical power, especially in

the RD approach. Thus, our main use of the NLSY79 data is to compare the point estimates to

those from the ECLS-K.




IV. Results

A. Main ECLS-K Models

         Table 3 presents the main results of our analysis, based on the ECLS-K sample.                  10  Recall

that the basic model took the form:

         Yi = f(agei, Xi, school exposurei).


9For the mothers, this implies dropping observations outside the range of 15 to 66 and for the children, outside the
range of 11 to 40.
10Appendix Table 1 provides summary statistics.


                                                                                                              10

In each of the models in this table, the function of agei that we use is a cubic of age in days

(relative to the starting cutoff) that is estimated separately before and after the cutoff. In all but

column (1), Xi includes dummies for race, gender, mother's education and state. Only state

dummies are included in column (1). The measures of school exposurei and of Yi used vary by

column and panel and are indicated in the table and described in more detail below. All models

use standard errors that are robust to heteroskedasticity and within-school correlation in the error

terms. 11



        The top panel presents the simple OLS estimate of the model using actual school

exposure. Since in this sample individuals are either in kindergarten or in first grade (i.e., have 1

or 2 years of school), this exposure variable is simply a dummy variable for being observed in

first grade. Columns (1) and (2) estimate the relationship to ln(BMI). Controlling for additional

demographics makes very little difference, and in both cases, greater school exposure is

positively, and statistically significantly, correlated with body weight. The same is true in

columns (3) and (4), where the probability of being obese and overweight, respectively are

significantly higher with more school exposure. In column (5), the relationship with the

probability of being underweight is negative, but not significant at conventional levels.

        As noted above, though, to the extent that parental decisions to comply with the starting

date cutoff are influenced by factors correlated with body weight, then these OLS estimates will

be seriously biased. Thus, the most appropriate interpretation of this top panel is not that school

exposure causes children to gain weight. Rather, it appears that the determination of school

"readiness" that parents make either includes body weight explicitly, or includes things that are

highly correlated with it, since the younger starters are significantly heavier than the older

starters when observed at the same age.

11Clustering standard errors on centered age (in days) yields similar inferences.


                                                                                                 11

        The second panel substitutes predicted school exposure for actual school exposure,

meaning we use a dummy variable for being predicted to be in first grade ("making the cutoff" in

the ECLS-K), given the child's birth date relative to the school entry cutoff date. Thus, this

panel implements the regression discontinuity approach. The effect of removing the endogeneity

of the school starting decision is clear: school exposure is now negatively related to ln(BMI), as

shown in columns (1) and (2). However, the estimated effect is not statistically significant.

Appendix Figure 1 illustrates this result, plotting weekly means of ln(BMI) (as in Figure 1) as

well as predicted fits from the RD specification. While the impact on the probability of being

overweight also becomes negative, the estimated effect on the probability of being obese remains

positive, albeit smaller than in the first panel, and not statistically significant. Interestingly, the

negative effect in column (4) comes closer to being significant than any of the other columns, but

the p-value is still just 0.156. Appendix Figure 2 illustrates this model. Finally, as was the case

with the OLS model in the top panel, there is no discernible effect of school exposure on the

probability of being underweight, although in this RD model the point estimate is very close to

zero and the p-value is very high.

        While these RD models are a straightforward approach to using the variation in school

exposure stemming from school starting dates, they can also be thought of simply as the reduced

form to an instrumental variables approach, which is carried out in the bottom two panels. Using

whether a child is predicted to be in first grade (based on age and school cutoff date) as an

instrument for actually being in first grade results in a very strong first stage. As was clear in

Figure 1, however, the presence of noncompliers means the prediction is not perfect, giving us a

coefficient of 0.64 instead of the 1.0 that would be obtained with perfect compliance. The IV

estimates in the bottom panel are consistent with the reduced form estimates in the second panel,




                                                                                                  12

but have essentially just been scaled up to reflect the fuzziness of the discontinuity.              12  While we

are unable to reject that the estimated effects are equal to zero, in all cases except for columns (3)

and (5), we can reject that the IV estimates are the same as the OLS estimates. For example, in

column (2) the IV point estimate suggests that an additional year of school reduces BMI by 1.6

percent, and this effect is significantly different from the OLS point estimate that suggests that an

additional year of school increases BMI by 1.6 percent. Given the pattern of OLS versus IV

estimates, it is clear that there is a positive bias in the OLS estimates. It does appear that parents

are taking into consideration some factor(s) correlated with body weight when deciding whether

to comply with school starting date cutoffs. The IV estimates suggest that increased school

exposure is not likely to (on net) increase body weight. There is also not statistically strong

evidence that it decreases body weight.

B. Alternate ECLS-K Models and Subgroup Analyses

          Table 4 repeats the same exercise as in Table 3, but with a set of alternate outcomes. The

purpose here is two-fold. First, as a falsification exercise, we look at two physical outcomes that

should not be affected by an additional year of school exposure. Column (1) looks at ln(height),

while column (2) looks at ln(birthweight).          13  The positive and significant coefficients in these

columns in the first panel are just further evidence that the OLS models are biased due to parents

basing school starting decisions on unobservable characteristics of the child that are correlated

with physical attributes.      14 By focusing on the school starting date cutoffs, though, the spurious

significantly positive effect is removed. For height, the RD and IV point estimates are



12Thus, looking at column (4), for example, -0.0441 / 0.638  -0.0692.
13Technically, school exposure could affect height if education increases nutritional quality sufficiently, but this is
unlikely to be the case in the United States when comparing kindergarteners to first graders.
14Obviously, parents may actually be making decisions based on height (e.g. not wanting the child to be the smallest
in class) or on birthweight (e.g. basing decisions for premature children based on age since conception). The key is
that the results in this panel cannot represent causal estimates, and the same is true of Table 3.


                                                                                                                13

essentially zero, while for birth weight the positive estimate is cut almost to a third of the OLS

coefficient, and is not statistically significantly different from zero.

         Column (3) documents that the RD and IV approaches used here find strong impacts of

school exposure on student test scores, as the literature suggests. Column (3) is the score on a

math test, standardized across both grades. The expectation is that when standardizing across

grades, having more school exposure is helpful, since a child with two years of school has

presumably learned more than one with just a single year of school. Comparing the top panel

with the bottom, we first again see the positive bias in the OLS estimates. Since parents are

more likely to hold back a child that is less prepared academically, and vice versa, school

exposure will appear to have a more positive impact on academic outcomes. While the IV

estimates are less positive, they are very precisely estimated and significantly different from both

zero and the OLS estimates.        15  Thus, we see that children are learning something in school ­ an

extra year of schooling increases performance on the standardized test by just over three-quarters

of a standard deviation.

         At this point, it appears that there is no deleterious effect of school exposure on children's

weight outcomes. If anything, the point estimates imply a small, but insignificant, reduction in

BMI and the probability of being overweight. If being in school is better for weight outcomes,

what are the potential mechanisms? One clear possibility is that being in school reduces

opportunities for eating outside of prescribed times. As shown in Anderson, Butcher and

Schanzenbach (2011), cutting the equivalent of one Oreo cookie per school day (about 300

calories per week) out of a child's diet over the course of a school year can reduce BMI by over

2 percent. Thus, a reduction in snacking upon going to school can reduce body weight. At the



15Appendix Figure 3 graphs the results of the reduced form model from column (3), making clear how much more
precise the estimates are for this outcome compared to the body weight results from the previous table.


                                                                                                         14

same time, much of the school day is spent sitting still and a reduction in activity can increase

body weight. However, most children are not continuously active when out of school, and

school does (usually) provide recess and physical education. For some children, providing such

an opportunity for physical activity may actually increase their daily exercise.

        Recall, however, that some studies have shown deleterious effects of certain school

environments. In the case of exposure to junk food in schools, this exposure is relatively low in

kindergarten and first grade, with the largest exposure coming in high school. The positive

effect on obesity found in Anderson and Butcher (2006), for example, was based on a sample of

adolescents. For the comparison in this paper, between being exposed to just kindergarten versus

first grade, exposure to junk food in school is unlikely to play a major role. However, exposure

to school lunch is likely to be more important. As shown in Schanzenbach (2009), eating the

school lunch, even at young ages, results in a higher probability of overweight. With this effect

in mind, we repeat the models of Table 3, estimated separately for those who report eating the

school lunch and those who report not eating it. Tables 5a and 5b present these results.

        The basic patterns seen in both tables are similar to those from Table 3, in that positive

OLS point estimates generally reverse to negative IV point estimates. However, these point

estimates are much more negative for the sample in Table 5b of those not eating school lunches.

In fact, the effect on the probability of overweight is marginally significant, with a p-value of

0.07. 16 It is important to remember that eating or not eating school lunch is not exogenous.

Poorer children qualifying for free or reduced-price lunch are more likely to eat school lunch, for

example. This likely difference in socioeconomic status may be the driving force behind the

difference in the first stages across Tables 5a and 5b. While in both cases the first stage is very

strong, the point estimate is much larger in Table 5a, implying that there are fewer non-compliers

16The results from the reduced form model are shown in Appendix Figure 4.


                                                                                               15

in that sample. Recall the earlier discussion of red-shirting being mainly a higher socioeconomic

phenomenon, which is consistent with these results.

        We next investigate whether the finding that school exposure may be healthful provided

one does not eat lunch is not just a reflection of differences across the socioeconomic class of

school-lunch-eaters and non-school-lunch-eaters. Thus, we also split the sample by whether the

child's family had ever participated in a broader set of poverty-alleviation programs. In addition

to ever getting free or reduced-price lunch, we included anyone who reported being food

insecure, or participating in Food Stamps, Head Start, or WIC. Appendix Tables 2a and 2b

present the results of this exercise. Whereas like Tables 5a and 5b, the first stage estimate is

much higher in Appendix Table 2a than 2b, the differences in results are less noticeable and are

generally in line with the overall sample results in Table 3. That said, the point estimates are

slightly more negative for the group of poverty program non-participants, but unlike those not

eating school lunch, the results never come close to being statistically significantly different from

zero.

C. NLSY79 Models

        Based on the estimates from the ECLS-K data using variation in school exposure due to

state school starting-age cutoff dates, there is no evidence that being in school, per se, contributes

to children's weight gain. If anything, it appears possible that school is helpful, with the possible

exception of those eating the school lunch. To assess the robustness of these findings across a

wider age range, in this section we investigate similar models estimated with the children of the




                                                                                               16

NLSY. Appendix Tables 3 and 4 present results similar to those in Table 3 for two different

samples of NLSY children.         17



        Appendix Table 3 limits the sample to children who were five or six in the fall of the

survey year, and thus, should most closely parallel the ECLS-K sample. Unfortunately, the small

samples result in estimates even less precise than those from the ECLS-K. In fact, it is not even

possible to reject the null hypothesis that the OLS and IV models are the same. That said, there

is no evidence from these NLSY results that our previous conclusions are seriously misguided.

Even when we expand the NLSY sample to all pre-adolescent children aged five to ten, in

Appendix Table 4, the imprecision remains.              18



        Ultimately, what we take from these estimates is confirmation of our ECLS-K findings.

The fact that we do not find deleterious effects of school exposure is reasonable evidence that

those effects are unlikely to exist. At the same time, being in school may be better for children

than we are able to estimate, but it seems safe to conclude that one's best bet for reaping the

weight benefits from school exposure will come for those not participating in the school lunch

program.




V. Conclusions

        Public health policymakers have tended to focus on schools as an important battleground

in the fight against childhood obesity, feeling that the current school environment may be a

contributing factor to the increase in childhood obesity (e.g. Haskins et al. 2006). While studies

have found that eating school lunches and being exposed to junk food in schools may result in

17In both tables, standard errors are robust to heteroskedasticity and within-family correlation in the error terms.
School entry cutoff dates by state and year were collected by the authors from state session laws and assigned to
individuals based on birthdate and state of residence at age five.
18Results for alternative outcomes are available on request. Even using standardized math scores as in column (3)
of Table 4 does not result in statistically significant results for 5-6 year-olds, although 10 percent significance is
obtained with the expanded age group.


                                                                                                                  17

weight gain (Schanzenbach 2009, Anderson and Butcher 2006), these studies only show that

some school environments are worse than others. They do not necessarily imply that the school

environment in general is worse than the non-school environment. In fact, other studies indicate

that summer is worse than the school year for weight gain (von Hippel et al. 2007) and that teen

girls with more education are less likely to be overweight (Zhang 2007).

        In this paper, we use school starting age cutoff dates to compare weight outcomes for

similar age children with one versus two years of school exposure. As is the case with academic

outcomes, school exposure is related to unobserved determinants of weight outcomes. If one

does not account for this endogeneity, it appears that an additional year of school exposure

results in a greater BMI and a higher probability of being overweight or obese. When actual

exposure is instrumented with predicted school exposure in a regression discontinuity

framework, the significant positive effects disappear. However, while the point estimates

generally become negative and are significantly different from the OLS results, they are not

statistically significantly different from zero. One exception is the effect of school exposure on

the probability of being overweight for children who do not participate in the school lunch

program. However, we are cautious in interpreting this result as entirely causal, since the sample

is based on the endogenous decision whether to participate in the school lunch program.

        The fact that the OLS and IV results are statistically significantly different is somewhat

interesting in its own right. Researchers have long recognized that endogeneity of the school-

starting decision biases estimates of the effect of schooling on academic outcomes, as parents

will take into account a child's academic readiness (unobserved to the researcher) in making that

decision. Our results make clear that either these unobserved traits are highly correlated with

physical attributes like BMI and overweight, or these physical traits are directly taken into




                                                                                              18

account. Our findings lead us to conclude that school exposure, per se, seems unlikely to cause

weight gain, and may even be beneficial.
