Pamela_Crossley
History
Thinking_About_Ethnicity_in_Early_Modern_China

    THINKING ABOUT ETHNICITY IN EARLY MODERN CHINA

                                   Pamela Kyle Crossley*


   "Ethnicity," whatever one may mean by it, has emerged as a seminal
issue in historical, sociological and cultural exchange. It has become a
catchphrase whose elasticity is in some ways welcome, in some ways to be
regretted. This short essay will discuss the apparent problems in the histor-
ical origins of "minority nationalities" concepts in China and of "ethnic
groups" concepts in the West, together with the implications for social and
cultural history of the present discourse on "ethnicity" in China. Any one
of these topics would be worth a book, and the space allotted to each of
them here will be insufficient. The central arguments of the essay are, first,
that there is an irreconcilable incompatibility between sinological concepts
(including "sinicization") and contemporary ethnic studies. Second, the
importance of diachronic studies of the concepts of "race," "ethnicity" and
"nationality" will be advocated both for the study of China and for the
study of the study of China. Priorities for discussion have been formed
around the presentation in this issue of three important and innovative
studies     concerning social           phenomena associated with ethnicity in
nineteenth-century China, which has put a particular emphasis upon the
importance of the concept of "ethnicity" for social and cultural history.
The present work, in other words, is simply that of a historian surveying
the challenges anthropology and sociology offer our field at present.
   It is not self-evident that "ethnicity" is an appropriate or exceptionally
fruitful concept for the analysis of Chinese late imperial social history.1

   I am indebted to Dm Gladney and Sergei Kan, who have kindly looked over the
manuscript and attempted to suggest improvements; to the editors of Late Imperial China;
and to Barbara Calli for editorial assistance. James Tatum, Robin Yates, William Scott,
Gene Garthwaite, Mary Wilson, Marilyn Young and Po-chia Hsia have all provided il-
luminating discussion of some particulars introduced into this essay. I claim all stubbornly
persisting errors of fact or interpretation. The essay was written and revised during a period of
support by the Darthmouth College Junior Faculty Fellowship program and the Marion and
Jasper Whiting Foundation, for which I am grateful. I am also indebted for institutional sup-
port to the history faculties and libraries of Smith College and Yale University.
1 A similar argument (for a different audience) is made very forcefully by Tapper 1988, which
was kindly shown to me by Gene Garthwaite after reading a completed text of the present ar-
ticle. Tapper places far greater stress upon the issue of political and anthropological manipu-
lation of ethnic criteria, but his distillation of "discourses" (scholarly, official and popular) is
fundamentally consonant with many of the points I am attempting to make here.

                       Late Imperial China 11, No. 1     (June 1990): 1-34
                                T by the Society for Qing Studies

                                                1

2                                                                          Pamela Kyle Crossley


Though it is not explicitly stated in any of the essays in this issue, the
implicit assumption is that ethnicity in one form or another was present in
China and was significant. As must always be the case when a large ana-
lytic concept is invoked, the first ground of revelation is the intellectual
context of the writer, and China's past as an "objective" phenomenon
remains at some remove. The present predilection for identifying ethni-
city as a phenomenon in China and using it as an analytical tool has evi-
dently grown out of an awareness that the "sinicization" (or "sinification")
commonplace received from previous generations of China scholars was
conceptually flawed, intellectually inert and impossible to apply to real his-
tory.2 Sinicization was not merely a convenient word describing accultura-
tion to Chinese culture or assimilation by it, but was a bundle of assump-
tions regarding the reasons for and the manifestations of cultural change
throughout a very broad expanse of Asia. In itself, the idea of sinicization
(hanhua) may someday be a suitable object for study and analysis. Its con-
ceptual flaw lay in its circularity. To be "sinicized" was to become "like the
Chinese," who were only those who had been previously sinicized. This is
self-evidently counterhistorical in the sense that Chinese culture, the char-
acter of which is at issue in "sinicization," has been an uninterrupted pro-
cess of mutation due in part to the challenging and differentiating effects
of aboriginal, border and heterodox cultures. The barest implications of
"sinicization" were that Chinese culture was somehow autochthonous, rigid
and exclusive, and in contact with other worlds either obliterated or was
obliterated. Secondarily, it was implied that through nothing much more
subtle than the sheer charisma of Chinese culture, peoples were attracted
to China and its society from elsewhere and, no great obstacle withstand-
ing, were consumed in the flames of hanhua. In fact, no very accom-
plished practitioner of "sinicization" theory would rest with these unsophis-
ticated generalizations, and the phrases "semi-sinicized," "partially sini-
cized," the like were frequently coined, despite the fact that qualified sinici-
zation can hardly be sinicization, and in the end means exactly nothing.
   The decline of "sinology" as an intellectual system has forced scholars
working in all disciplines to confront the basic unpersuasiveness of the
special pleadings at work in the notion of "sinicization." China is not a dis-
cipline unto itself, and commands no unique concepts, methods or para-
digms for its study. On the contrary sinology3 was what structuralists
2 A portion of the conclusion of my book is devoted to a discussion of the role of "siniciza-
tion" in the historical hypotheses of Wittfogel and Wright as they related to nineteenth-
century Manchus in China. See Crossley 1990:223-228.
3 I do not use "sinology" in the minor sense it has acquired in the social sciences as a term for
a China specialist within an established discipline, as a proctologist is a specialized physician.
I use it in the older, still more widely recognized sense of one whose field is precisely China,
or more properly Chinese culture. Sinologists, eqyptologists, indologists and so on could all,

Thinking About Ethnicity in Early Modern China3


would identify as a phenomenology, a self-referential theory of empathie
knowledge that led only toward idiolect.4 Moreover, no culture has been
shown to be charismatic in the sense implied by the concept of siniciza-
tion. Inevitably, "sinicization" depended upon an unskeptical approach to
the civil ideal in Chinese elite culture, and upon looking uncuriously at
the history of Chinese conquest in what is now south and southwest
China, northwest China, the Northeast, Taiwan and Tibet, as well as the
continuous internal reconquests that were frequently necessary.
   As integral to China's social history as militarization has been economic
vitality and diversity. Speaking Chinese and catering to Chinese tastes
could be commercially advantageous, and it is not miraculous that many
border peoples with no other very profound interest in Chinese culture
adapted in limited ways. The vibrancy of Chinese economic life has been
explored, again, in direct proportion to the decline of "sinicization" and to
the rise of its nemesis, "popular culture." The renewed emphasis upon
social economics has also allowed a new approach to the question of
subaltern elites, particularly with respect to the emergence of commercially
oriented education and the evolution of merchant cultures in localities
such as Fuzhou and Huizhou. Markets, roads, canals, guilds, temples,
mosques, and commercial production and exchange have become better
defined as nodal points in our understanding of China's social rhythms,
allowing local cultures, religions and solidarities to emerge sharply from

alternatively, call themselves "orientalists." The intellectual assumptions and limitations of
orientalism, all of which apply equally to sinology, were of course identified by Edward Said
1978. The book's most labored points--the role of racism in orientalist discourse and the
status of the Orient as a historically deconstructable construction--would not need to be la-
bored today; on the other hand, the work's subtleties on the intellectual heritages of oriental-
ism remain somewhat neglected and--though it contains no direct comment on the problem
of constructing ethnicity--deserve to be reread by all who would introduce ethnic discourse
into their works.    Raymond Schwab's 1950 classic work on eighteenth and nineteenth-
century orientalist scholarship has recently been reissued in English with a forward by Said
(formerly "Raymond Schwab and the Romance of Ideas, Daedalus 105:1 [Winter 19761), see
Schwab 1984.
4 Use of the word "empathie" here should not necessarily be read to mean sympathetic, since
it is well known that orientalists in general frequently came to condemn the "Eastern mind"
as ill-prepared for science, justice, or history. To analyze the contradictory sentiments--
which were not incidental to the discipline, but were necessarily its foundation--of sinologists
toward their objects of study is obviously far afield of the present discussion.
    I use the term "structuralist" here and elsewhere loosely, to include many cultural histori-
ans and social theorists (e.g. Claude Lévi-Strauss) who are famous for resisting the label even
though their scholarship is widely recognized to be structuralistic in spirit and in influence.
For a compact but by no means neutral overview see Pettit 1975. On the unstructural origins
of structuralism (and an analogy to the unprimordial origins of primordialism) see also Boon
1972.

4                                                          Pamela Kyle Crossley


the fog of "sinicization."
   Finally, the Chinese imperial institution, which proved repeatedly its
allure for chieftains on China's periphery, was unique in the region, and
was regarded as a package: The emperor stabilized his position through
reification of his power to choose his own heir, he based himself in an
imperial capital where noble rivals had few or no ancestral claims,
employed a bureaucracy which used a script and which adhered to certain
rituals, all of which interacted to create the facade of legitimacy and to
provide the precise tools for the excising of the power of noble rivals. In
the cases of Xiaowen di of the Northern Wei, Abaoji of the Liao, Aguda
of the Jurchen Jin, Hung Taiji of the Later Jin/Qing, the manipulation of
the Chinese imperial tradition was conscious, calculated and tailored to
optimize the discretionary powers of the new "emperor" as an individual;
tensions between these men and their nobles were immediate, for the
nobles in question (who would not be writing their own histories, in any
event) were under no illusions that these imperial revolutions had any pur-
pose other than unprecedented concentration of power in the hands of a
single man.
   One might say, then, that "sinicization" as a habit of thought among
China scholars depended for its sustenance upon a rather firm commit-
ment to what were perceived as the tenets of Chinese classicism: a rever-
ence for the imputedly inherent transformative power of civilization, a dis-
taste for displays of military power, a contempt for commerce and semi-
literate or illiterate cultural values. It should not, of course, be thought
that all Chinese scholars were sinicizationists; on the contrary many scho-
lars in China and in Taiwan have attempted to avoid the assumptions of
hanhua and have introduced a small but to date rather unstable vocabu-
lary (e.g. tonghua, xianghua, ronghe) to give more definitive expression to
the varieties of cultural exchange occurring continuously between the
center and the periphery (a dichotomy that is more informed by power
than by geography).     Indeed sinicization as a historical concept was so
weak and was so frequently challenged by scholars both in China and in
the West--see for example almost any work by Wolfram Eberhard; Owen
Lattimore's "frontier style;" Chen Yinke's and Xiang Da's theses on alien
exploitation of Chinese political instruments and Central and Inner Asian
impact upon the cultural traditions of the Northern Qi, Sui and Tang
regimes; Wittfogel and Feng's "symbiosis" model; or Jin Yufu's "exploiting
of Han scholars" (liyong hanren)--that its survival as part of the vocabu-
lary of China study up very nearly to the present moment might best be
addressed in terms of devotion to its basic conceits by generations of

Thinking About Ethnicity in Early Modern China5

Western scholars trained in part by Chinese mentors with the strongest
possible ideological commitments to the underpinnings of sinology and
"sinicization."5 To wonder whether the Western stalwarts of "sinicization"
were attracted to the study of China because of their sympathy with this
complex of values or whether they acquired it in the course of their train-
ing would be to enter an endless circle of reasoning. It would be unfair
too, for no one advocates socializing China scholars to be hostile toward
Chinese elite values on the supposition that this will lead to more "objec-
tive" thinking. But as the disciplines of China study have become more
integrated with established and evolving disciplinary discourse, it has inev-
itably occurred that questions of imperialism, localism, and popular cul-
ture have been directed to Chinese history of the early modern period.
Consequently, "hegemony" and "ethnicity" have risen; sinology and sinici-
zation have set.
   The importance of this relationship, between the emergence of what is
in essence a post-structuralist approach and the disintegration of "sinol-
ogy," is underscored by the fact that symbolic anthropology has played a
similar part in the opening up of the cultural and social history of Europe,
where local histories, studies of popular mentalités, and of social ideology,
all of which are part of a new discourse of historical "ethnography," have
come to dominate.6 The works of historians directly or indirectly
influenced by Geertzian views, such as Natalie Zemon Davis, Robert
Darnton, Le Roy Ladurie and Carlo Ginsburg are most prominent,
perhaps, but are merely representative of a broad change in historical
inquiry and writing over the course of the past twenty years. Certainly eth-
nographies in this spirit have been produced in the China field, yet beyond
a claim that they represent a new interest in "popular culture," there has

5 Perhaps the most subtle and persuasive recent discussion of "sinicization" in medieval China
is a passage in BoI 1987. In its basic distinction between "adoption of institutions and value
structures" and "social transformation," (following in part upon earlier distinctions made by
John Dardess) as well as its identification of a wen complex of official acculturation associated
with the emperorship, the passage makes obsolete many previous attempts to sustain "sinici-
zation" analysis on the basis of Jin political history, and this is only one virtue of an eassay
that is in all respects a maor addition to scholarship, in any language, on the Jurchen Jin. It
is unlikely, however, that a majority of readers will find the thesis too novel, or in the
author's words, "far-fetched," to be accepted. It fits very neatly into the chain already forged
by the authors noted here, and is certainly in agreement with the analysis of the Later
Jin/Qing state that I have been developing since 1984 ("The 'Culturing' Emperor," "Emperor-
ship and Identity in Qing China." See Lattimore 1940; Wittfogel and Feng 1947; Chen 1977;
Jin 1974; Xiang 1957, 1979).
6 My observation has been paralleled by the argument of Shanin 1980 on the connections
between the rise of ethnology and that of peasant studies.

6                                                                          Pamela Kyle Crossley

been little attempt to trace the intellectual momentum behind this style of
inquiry.7
   Ethnic discourse has not completely outgrown its ancestral relationship
to a racial discourse of earlier times, and thus its character as a series of
constructs--or, in Geertz' usage, "ideations"--does not emerge tran-
sparently from most writing on ethnicity. To the historian, the role of
constructive discourse is particularly salient. Certainly contemporary his-
torians are not obliged to adopt the rather ahistorical (anadiachronic)
analysis of those anthropologists or sociologists who continue to debate the
issue of whether there is anything essential, or objective, underlying histor-
ical manifestations of ethnicity or ethnic consciousness.8 The comparison
7 This applies, in my opinion, to the flagship collection on popular culture edited by Johnson,
Nathan and Rawski 1985. Several authors refer to works on French or English history for
comparison in their discussions, and two (Johnson and Rawski) refer to theoretical works of
Geertz and Gramsci. None, however, attempt to place themselves--as opposed to their
subjects--within the context of the rise of "popular history" as a broader discourse and a
coherent conceptual development.
8    Harrell      1990     has     very    usefully    simplified      and    summarized       the
"primordialist/circumstantialist" controversy for readers, and the disagreement brushes the
surface of all three essays. The scholar viewing this debate from outside anthropology proper
assumes that the dichotomy is heuristic.          The issue of primordial, or "pre-existing"
qualities--whose articulation is attributed to Edward Shils and with major qualifications to
the early Clifford Geertz (but the historian suspects they were adumbrated by Max Weber)--
entails a proposition that certain cultural phenomena are in fact pre-interpretive, pre-
historical--i.e. pre-cultural. The interpretive, historical, cultural fundaments of identity--for
instance, a people's belief that identity may be realized through immutable ancestral
connections--have been effectively characterized as "charters" by scholars diverging from the
primordialist terminology, and many writers who discuss primordial characteristics do in fact
mean something like ethnic charters (for instance, Judith Nagata characterizes ethnic senti-
ments as those :" ...that draw on a (putative) notion of common blood, origin, descent or kin-
ship connection as a reason for being or acting ..." from Gladney 1987. The revised theme of
primordial "sentiments" is also historically elusive, since sentiments must have a beginning,
which can only mean that they have a circumstance. In the final analysis this comes down to
a question of ritual (as Harrell's essay here very strongly suggests), which returns it again to
the work of Geertz and, to certain degree, Mary Douglas. An illuminating meditation on pri-
mordiality and syntheticism (circumstantialism, process) in cultural history is Needham 1978.
   As Harrell has noted, Charles Keyes and others have begun to revise the circumstantialist
position--the dominant position in recent years--by according some role for primordiality.
See    particularly    Keyes    1976,  which     provides    a   succinct   discussion    of   the
primordial/circumstantial disagreement, then proceeds to refute the circumstantialist
position--anticipated by Emile Durkheim and Alfred Kroeber, but associated until recently
with Marshall Sahlins and now with Eric Wolf--with the statement that ethnicity that was
not even partially primordial, but wholly circumstantial ("situational") would be "entirely arbi-
trary and without analytic value," a premise that can only strike the historian as remarkable.
The "nature vs. nurture" analogy used by some revisionists to justify such an intermediary po-
sition appears to the historian to be false. Ethnic primordialism is undemonstrable by histori-
cal criteria, is not genuinely analogous to the question of innate, genetically determined or in-
stinctual traits of humanity, and its reintroduction for the sake of providing a "balanced" revi-
sion seems questionable.
    The only primordial characteristics that can be truly "pre-existing" are self-evidently biolog-
ical (which primordialists have suggested is affectively analogized by beliefs in common des-

Thinking About Ethnicity in Early Modern China7


of academic ethnic discourse to earlier discussions of "race" is not merely a
comparison, after all, but is also substantially relevant. In discussions of
ethnicity with respect to China thus far there has been a common failure
to deal with levels of ambiguity in the applications of "ethnicity," "nation,"
and "race" as words. The crudest sort of default, in this author's opinion,
is that of failing to distinguish between a phenomenon and a concept.
Many ideas that have no discernable objective foundation have proven to
be significant ideas nevertheless, and one may read a history of astrology,
alchemy or creationism not in order to learn the "science" behind them
but to understand their place in cultural history. One finds in current
writing about China a delicacy in use of the word "race." The fear seems
to be that readers will mistake a reference to the idea of race for a refer-
ence to the phenomenon of race. As a consequence "ethnic group" seems
to play a role in contemporary China scholarship that is rather like its
appearance among American sociologists of the 1960's. "Race"--whether
the descent model of the Enlightenment or the biologically-based,
Darwinistic model of the nineteenth century is irrelevant here--as an
empirical concept had been rejected.                  "Ethnic group," in the sense it
fulfilled in Glazer and Moynihan's "melting pot," was a more acceptable
way of referring to the perceived physical, religious, linguistic, sartorial and
cultural distinctness of groups within plural and pluralistic societies. In
many cases it was no more than a substitute for "race," in the sense that it
indicated undifferentiated bundles of social, cultural, linguistic and reli-
gious issues, with no address given to the roles of the consciousness of
either social actors or the scholar attempting to analyze their actions.
Insofar as "race" as a putatively objective phenomenon (outside, perhaps,
the professional lexicons of physical anthropology and epidemiology) is
intellectually bankrupt, the mere substitution of "ethnic group" for "race" is
equally invalid, yet in much contemporary writing on China this is the
sum total of the effect of using the terms "ethnicity" and "ethnic group."
"Race" and "ethnic group" are frequently confounded, so that not only
their peculiarities as intellectual constructs but also their historical rela-
tionship to one another are obscured. Though the defining character of
cent), and it is perhaps this, combined with the circularity of the primordialist argument
when applied to history, that has prompted what appears to be the rather extreme revisionism
of Pierre L. van den Berghe (guest editor of the Ethnicity volume in which the Keyes' essay
cited above appears), who has adapted sociobiology to the study of ethnicity. In earlier work
van den Berghe has emphasized the importance of kinship structures in ethnic and national
relationships; and in van den Berghe 1981 he replies to the "anti-primordialists"--whom he
identifies as liberals and Marxists--by claiming ethnicity to be, in essence, a social and cultur-
al strategy for genetic survival. Van den Berghe takes the circumstantialists to task for dis-
carding "race" as an objective phenomenon and treating it instead as a feature of cultural and
social history. For a rebuttal of sociobiology as a discipline and of its application to the study
of human culture, see Sahlins 1976. For a more specific discussion of the implications of so-
ciobiology for the study of ethnicity see Smith 1983.

8                                                                          Pamela Kyle Crossley

"ethnic group" is commonly agreed to be ethnic consciousness, the term is
casually used to describe peoples of all periods of Chinese history, for
whom no ethnic consciousness can be remotely demonstrated; the practice
is a residual effect of the period when such groups were called "races," and
the discredited word is now replaced not by the malleable "peoples" but by
the inoffensive (though anachronistic and intellectually slack) "ethnic
group."
   This tendency has been effectively characterized by Michael Banton as
an error of "presentism," and it threatens to impoverish analyses of the
emergence of racial thinking and the extent of its consequences.                              In
China, for instance, it can hardly be denied that orthodox thought of the
Ming period encompassed a concept of racial descent, one that was
roughly consonant with the descent-group construct of early modern
Europe. For a time the Qing state rejected this as a philosophy of identity.
Ultimately, Qianlong court ideology in China embraced (with some
difficulty) a concept of race bearing basic similarities to the earlier con-
struct, and that concept subsequently played a role in the shaping of the
ethnic consciousness of some peoples at the end of the Qing period. In
other words, identity during the Qing period seems to have an internal
diachronicity, a development from cultural to racial to ethnic arenas of
negotiation.9 Unless one has resort to the term "race," it is impossible to
distinguish the late phenomenon of ethnic consciousness from one of its
ancestral roots in racial thinking of the eighteenth century or earlier.
Diachronie studies of "racial," "national" and "ethnic" consciousnesses
would be handicapped, while "race" and "ethnicity" would remain mingled
with each other, their process of differentiation forever muddled by the
notion that "ethnic group" is just a better word for what was once called
"race."
   Quite apart from the question of the appearance of race as a concept in
China is the question of the rise and fall of race as a concept in Western
scholarship on China. An illuminating case study might be Altaicism as a
theory and a discipline. Nineteenth century research on Altaicism was
fundamentally inspired by the linguistic theories of eighteenth and early
nineteenth century orientalists bent upon proving the past existence of an
"Indo-European" (Aryan) race and its pure survival in the German peo-
ple.10 This model of cultural development was carried over to early studies
9 I have attempted to narrate in some detail the impact upon the Chinese-martial bannermen
of this shift from cultural to racial criteria of identity in Crossley 1 989, the evolution of an
ethnic from a racial consciousness among the Manchus in Crossley 1990.
10Rejection of Egypt and the rise of comparative linguistics in the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries has been narrated with clarity and conviction by Bernal 1987:189-240. The general
point that Indo-European linguistic hypotheses had arisen from a romantic search for Ger-
manic origins (if the phrase is not oxymoronic) had previously been detailed in Schwab

Thinking About Ethnicity in Early Modem China9

of Turkic and Mongolian civilizations. The idea was that the languages
categorized as "Altaic" shared enough structural traits--though possibly
not enough lexical bits--to imply a single origin. Therefore there must
have originally been one language, spoken in one place, by one people. As
the people moved, they carried the language east and west, and it was
locally differentiated in several major stages, as were the people them-
selves. But the inability of the concept of race to withstand the scrutiny of
modern anthropology and cultural history has discredited the assumed
equation of one language with one people. The Altaic languages may
indeed be "genetically" related, or they may be, as S. R. Ramsey has
recently characterized the position, a "group of structurally related
languages who have mutually influenced each other over a time period
spanning millennia."11 In either case, the identification of hypothesized
racial groups with languages is unsupportable on the basis of historical
data. The languages of Inner and Central Asia have proven to be more
stable than the peoples with which they may be associated in the historical
record.
   The usefulness of diachronic analysis has, perhaps, proven itself also in
the study of the Manchus.12 By the late nineteenth and early twentieth

1984:1-224. The development of the Altaic hypothesis not only paralleled the rise of Indo-
Europeanism in time and method, but it must be noted that there was also a significant over-
lap in personnel, foremost, perhaps, being Henri-Jules de (Heinrich Julius von) Klaproth and
Abel Rémusat. Though a specialist in Chinese, Manchu and the Turkic languages of Central
Asia, Klaproth apparently knew some Persian and Sanskrit and made himself prominent
(Schwab calls him "the unavoidable Klaproth") for his rivalry with Jean François Champol-
lion in early nineteenth-century orientalist circles in Paris.
11See Ramsey 1987:179.
12The Manchus are an interesting example of ethnic group formation (that is, rise of an eth-
nic consciousness) in the late dynastic period for several reasons.       The least important,
perhaps, is irony: From being a dominant minority in the occupation regime, the Manchus,
or those who chose to retain Manchu identity, became only one of many minority nationali-
ties in the Chinese system. More important, the case of the emergence of ethnic conscious-
ness among the Manchus demonstrates the role that a construct of race, for a select group of
minorities, played. Under the empire, Manchus, Mongols, Tibetans, Uighurs and the Han
Chinese--as they were understood in the court view--were historical peoples, all part of the
creation or sustenance of the Qing regime (Liang Qichao's later conception of "historical" and
"ahistorical" peoples paralleled the divisions that are apparent in Qing court discourse, and he
further evinced his dependence of Qing concepts of identity in insisting that a people must
have a documented, unbroken history). The aboriginal peoples of China, or historical divi-
sions within the Chinese people, were not considered in the racial cosmos of the empire; they
were simply subsumed under the umbrella of guannei, where they had for previous centuries
been already subjected to the process of conquest and subordination.
   The Manchus came to the disintegration of the Qing empire with a well-documented and
imperially-endorsed construction of racial identity, which when catalyzed by the challenges of
rising Chinese nationalism readily found a terminology (manzu), a history, an attested
language and a homeland, all elements that fit together to aid in the formation a Manchu
ethnic consciousness.
   Further, the process of Manchu ethnicity is intimately and demonstrably associated with
the formation of Chinese nationalism. Chinese polemicists of the late nineteenth and early

10PamelaKyleCrossley

centuries Manchus were frequently called manzu (a nineteenth-century
neologism)13 or qiren.           Non-Manchus were commonly convinced that
Manchus could be distinguished from Chinese by racial physical traits, like
flat heads,14 or a remarkably white skin.15 Manchus, on the other hand,
were convinced that the source of their raciality lay in their bloodlines,
their ancestral connection to the Qing founding population and through
them to the great peoples of Northeast Asia. Both of these views were
false, in the sense that they were unrelated to phenotypical or historical
fact. They were, of course, true in the sense that their effect upon the
consciousness of believers was equal to that of phenotypical or historical
fact.

twentieth centuries relied upon an interpretation of the inimical racial histories of the Man-
chu and Chinese peoples for refinement, of both a Chinese identity and a Chinese nationalist
cause.
   Finally, the history of Manchu identity in the twentieth century is a case study in the am-
biguities of sociological and anthropological discourse in the West and in China.          The
Manchus are an unusual but not unique example of a "minority nationality" that is urban,
sinophone, and religiously undifferentiated from the modern Chinese population. Virtually
none of the anthropological criteria usually required by the People's Republic for recognition
of minority status apply to other than very small and remote pockets of the Manchu popula-
tion. Yet the option to register as Manchu (and enjoy the privileges of minority status) is
available to and utilized by Manchu descendants. Anthropology would derecognize a majori-
ty of this population. But sociology and cultural history would validate Manchu identity, be-
ginning the evidential train with the fact that an individual who claims an ethnic identity has
committed a culturally meaningful act.
13The term manzu for people claiming Manchu identity, and as a (possibly euphemistic) al-
ternative to qiren, appears in the writings of Jinliang around the turn of the century. Though
there is no evidence that he was the first Manchu to use this term, his usages of it are among
the earliest and best known, see Crossley 1990:185.        The origins of manzu (as used by
Chinese in reference to Manchus) may ultimately be traced to documents issued by the Taip-
ing government, in which hanzu, manzu and mengzu have been noted.
14I have heard Chinese of the present refer to the fact that Manchus have "flat" heads (at the
back), which I surmise was originally inspired by the fact that the Manchus shared the cus-
tom, attested in Central Asia from the time of the Huns and in Inner Asia much earlier, of
binding infants' heads in such as way as to deform, slightly or severely, the skull. I believe
that the Qianlong emperor was referring to precisely this practice (but not to the physiogno-
my of the Manchus) when he claimed that the custom proved Manchu provenance from the
ancient Sushens in the Northeast, who apparently practiced it also. See the edict of Sep-
tember 20, 1777, reprinted as front matter to Zhou yuanliu kao (1783), and paraphrased in
Crossley 1987.
15The allegation that Manchus were "white" had more than a descriptive inference, since it
was known that some eighteenth and early nineteenth century foreigners had forwarded a
"lost tribe" thesis of Manchu origins, and by the late nineteenth century some Chinese were
convinced that Manchus and Westerners were scheming together to destroy China (for an ex-
ample see Wiens 1 969: 1 9). It is possible that like many northern Chinese the Manchus may
have appeared to some to be light, but the impression was no doubt magnified by the stark
white make-up affected by Manchu women, who were seen in public with considerably more
frequency than Chinese women.

Thinking About Ethnicity in Early Modern China11

  The untrueness of these convictions is easily discerned from a
diachronic vantage. Manchus had first of all never been a single people,
and even the Manchu banners--the only definitive institution for histori-
cal identification of the Manchus--had been shaped to a certain degree by
logistical needs, convenience, and error. Moreover, by the turn of the
twentieth century qiren and manzu had come to be applied not only to
Manchu bannermen but in many cases also to Mongolian and Chinese-
martial bannermen. Finally, qiren and manzu were used to indicate
"bannermen" in the broadest possible sense. Qiren itself, which in earlier
times had applied to households enrolled in the banners, had been
stretched by circumstances into a very fuzzy signifier. Soon after the con-
quest it came to include zidi, the "sons and younger brothers" eligible to
be enlisted but not yet enlisted; at roughly the same period it came also to
be applied to cadets and supernumeraries. In the age after the Taiping
War, many bannermen had been induced or coerced into resigning banner
status, and even among those formally enlisted there were many who lived
with no particular connection to a garrison and with no hope of a stipend.
They, and often their descendants, were nevertheless liable to be called
qiren, without regard to actual legal status or to the once significant dis-
tinctions between stipended or unstipended, regular or irregular.
   As for the Manchus themselves, their sense of a grand unified cultural
and racial identity was an artifact of eighteenth-century court ideology.16
The true source of Manchu unity and identity in the very late nineteenth
century, it appears, was the internal strength of certain Manchu communi-
ties, which demurred to disintegrate in accord with signals from the court
after the Taiping War and particularly after the Boxer Uprising, when the
Qing court and its supporters began to struggle against Northeastern
separatism. From a lately-gained and rather unrefined sense of racial iden-
tity, the Manchus fashioned an ethnic consciousness17 for themselves in
the last decades of the Qing dynasty, and it seems to have survived, in
further changed form, to the present day. The context of imperial decay
and the coalescence of ethnic groupings and consciousness has cognates in
the transformation of other traditional empires (the Ottoman and

16 The particulars have been discussed in Crossley 1990:13.30.
17 1 am fairly sure that what we mean by ethnic consciousness is what is meant in Chinese by
minzu gongtong xinli suzhi, which is now agreed to be a component, though a very trouble-
some one, in the constitution of some minority nationalities. (See also notes 1 3 and 29) In
this context it is worth noting that the Manchus ("a nationality with a concrete, lengthy histo-
ry and comparatively advanced culture") are considered the best exemplars of this element.
See Xiong 1983.

12PamelaKyleCrossley

Romanov are obvious examples) into nations. As with all change over
time, the erosion of one style of thinking or expression by another is not
sudden or clear; there are periods in the late nineteenth and early twen-
tieth centuries, certainly, when both fundamentally "racial" and fundamen-
tally "ethnic" sensibilities may be discerned among the Manchus and other
peoples. Without resurrection of an historical interest in "race" as a politi-
cal and social ideology, its diachronic relationship to ethnic consciousness
can hardly be expressed.
   In contrast to the ethnology of the Soviet Union, neither English-
language scholarship nor Chinese-language scholarship has recourse to a
definitive vocabulary distinguishing various types of cohesive identities
from one another.            Where English flounders attempting to distinguish
"nation-state" from "nation," "nation" from "people,"                         "people" from
"nationality" or "ethnic group," Russian offers the compact natsiya (where
we might write "nation- state"), narod (where we might write "people,
nation," "nationality"), etnos (where we might write "people," "nationality,"
"subnationality," "ethnic group") and etnicheskaya gruppa (where we might
write "people," "nationality," "ethnic group"), among other precisions. In
nearly all of these instances, Chinese is obliged to make do with minzu,
and it is not surprising that both Chinese and Western academic writing
on ethnicity attempts to orient itself with frequent allusions to the preci-
sions of Russian terminology. Precision can, however, be as confining as
liberating, and this may be particularly true when the intellectual baggage
of the terms remains uninspected or, to be painfully current, "unpacked."
   Both English and Russian depend upon a fairly broad appreciation of
the capacities of the word "ethnic." It is well known that ethnology and
ethnography take their terminological and conceptual power from the root
ethnos. "Ethnicity" and "ethnic" do not historically refer to what we now
tend to call "ethnic groups," but are also drawn from the etymon ethnos.
The Greek root proclaims its meaning even to the modern reader:
"heathen," which was apparently applied to peoples living outside the
"civilized" urban centers, on the "heaths" (i.e. Latin paganus, "pagan"). Its
original use seems to have indicated bands, perhaps roving bands of peo-
ple, and it could be used to mean nothing much more complex than a
gang. But soon the word acquired overtones of kinship; in its ancient and
early modern usages it is related to concepts of what Banton calls "race as
descent"--the notion of identity based on ancestral affinities.18 Ethnos is
18 Banton 1980 distinguishes four basic modes of racial conceptualization: race as physiogno-
my, race as descent, race as "type," and race as a byproduct of Darwinian selection processes.
Insofar as these various ideas are historically intertwined and are all based upon a concept of
physical, moral or cultural tendencies being inexorably passed from one generation to anoth-
er, they are all justifiably identified as "racial" concepts, although they often work in very
different ways. See also Banton 1977 and Van den Berghe 1981:29-33.

Thinking About Ethnicity in Early Modern China13

self-consciously a formation from cultural centrality and eliteness, and fre-
quently labels the marginal, the uncivilized, the unassimilated, the com-
mon. In its origins it was not a neutral word for a "people," and it does
not invariably function as a neutral word for a people in modern usage.
It captured the elements of taxonomy, isolation and subordination to
which many peoples are subjected in imperial systems, and generated a
series of political terms that have disappeared, possibly because in modern
retrospect they might embarrass their users. Thus the "kings" of Judea
under the Roman empire were called by the Romans themselves (and the
Greeks before them) "ethnarchs,"19 and William Gladstone intended to
diminish the stature of Daniel O'Connell by calling him not a demogogue,
but an "ethnogogue." From late to early modern times, "ethnic" was akin
to "gentile," in the sense of neither Christian nor Jewish, and local devia-
tions from orthodox practice were called "ethnicisms."20
   In the history of Western thought, this local, particularist, minor, hetero-
dox, marginal quality is the historical essence of ethnicity. The conceptu-
ally coherent study of border and aboriginal populations, all at cultural or
philosophical odds with the orthodox, central establishment, has been part
of the cultural history of all empires, and many great traditions--that is,
the cultural edifices of many great empires--have had their ethnological
heritages. Ancient ethnology of the West has been extensively decoded, but
that of China remains largely undisturbed by modern analysis.21 Contem-
porary ethnography--by convention subsuming both ethnography and

19That is, the Romans adopted the Greek term with respect to the Jews, who inhabited a
Greek-speaking area. Abraham had been referred to as an ethnarch, and the term adhered to
Judean kings under the Roman empire. See Liddell and Scott 1968:480.
20This is one of the starting points for Royce's discussion of the career of "ethnicity as a con-
cept and a term" (she finds it as the first of definitions offered in Webster's), but my examples
are drawn from the Oxford English Dictionary pp. 313-314. For further elaborations see SoI-
lors 1986. It is important to emphasize that the term ethnos, after an early period of indicat-
ing "groups," shifted to mean those grouped by descent, and from there to those who were
marginalized or excluded because of their descent. Thus for Homer and Herodotus an ethnos
was a people (which comes close to its technical meaning in modern social science) or
perhaps a tribe (to the extent that an ethnos was divided by a genos), but afterwards might
mean any people marginalized or excluded--thus one finds it applied in Athens to the athlet-
ic clubs of non-Athenians, see Liddell and Scott 1968:480.
21Though work on ancient ethnology in the West is too voluminous to provide a sketch of
here, the early modern period is somewhat less explored, and one might note Hodgen 1964
and Boon 1982 as two unusually informative and conceptually challenging works. Islamic
ethnology, particularly the work of Ibn Khaldun, has also been treated to a great deal of
analysis in Western scholarship. Comparable work on the Chinese tradition has been rare.
Pulleyblank 1983:41 1-416; Schäfer 1963 and 1967; Tao 1983; and perhaps the first chapter of
Snow 1988 might form the basis of a reading list in English on traditional Chinese ethnology.

14PamelaKyleCrossley


ethnology in Western scholarship--remains the study of "minor" cultures
or practices. Since in the eye of the anthropologist or cultural historian all
discrete, coherent cultural styles are 'local,"22 ethnology has been and
remains the legitimate rubric for the science of comparative systems of
cultural cognition, and ethnography that of its descriptive art. The refer-
ence is to the fundamental meanings of "ethnicity," not to "ethnic groups"
as such, and it is this classic sense of ethnography that allows an approach
to local, coherent cultural styles among the people whom at large we call
"Chinese."
  Of all the Western terms associated with ethnos, "ethnic group" (ethni-
cheskaya gruppo) was the last to arrive. Suitably, it describes a
phenomenon that was the last to arrive. Its contrast with ethnos is often
implicit, but nevertheless clear. Where an ethnos was localized both geo-
graphically and within a cultural hierarchy--Barth remarked upon its
"archaic" qualities in this regard--an "ethnic group" is distinguished for its
ability to survive, even thrive, in the post-ascriptive (modern) era. An "eth-
nic group" might efficiently be defined as a collection of individuals shar-
ing consciousness of descent from an ethnos.23 In turn, the ethnos from
which one might claim descent was very likely defined by a taxonomizing
imperial system that may have established either friendly or hostile terms
of coexistence for the group and the empire. The resulting ethnic cons-
ciousness might be described as the summary expression of the tensions
existing between ethnies and the polities by which they are framed.24 Ele-
ments of historical tradition, as a consequence, are to an extent fungible,
and the historical consciousness that binds together the modern ethnic
group may itself prove illusive if followed to its sources. This crucial role
of historical consciousness raises many questions regarding the issue of
ethnicity among the han, or "Han Chinese." Stevan Harrell, whose own
use of "ethnic" is classic throughout his essay, casts doubt upon the useful-
ness of the word "subethnic."25 It may be that in the terminology of

22Hence Geertz' 'local knowledge," a play, as I read it, upon the intertwined localisms of the
observer and the observed in the doing of cultural anthropology. See Geertz 1983.
23This is      meant to summarize the elements of "sentiment," "identification," "self-
identification," "awareness," and so on invariably to be found in definitions of "ethnic group,"
and which may be represented in minzu gongtong xinli suzhi (see also notes 24 and 29). As
will be noted in my comments on the Manchus, this is a rather figurative definition of ethnic
group--Manchus did not descend from an ethnos, but formed a historically-derived cons-
ciousness that strongly imitated the effects of such descent. For an incisive summary of the
history of attempts to define and conceptualize ethnic consciousness, see Royce 1982.
24I take this to be the import of Barth's assertion that inter-group dynamics are the defining
mechanic in ethnic consciousness. See Barth 1969:15-19.
25See n. 16 for a sharp deflation of the pretensions of "subethnic."

Thinking About Ethnicity in Early Modern China15

"subethnic" which has become conventional when describing ethnicity
among the han we are looking at yet another legacy of sinology. That is, as
the han have only one admissible "language"--and the languages of China
become "dialects" in sinological idiolect--so they can only be one "people,"
and variations among that people become not "ethnic," but "subethnic."
Certainly the greater meaning of "ethnic" handily includes cultural varia-
tions among people who on one level all consider themselves han yet on
another evince recognizable ethnic consciousness. The intrusion of
"subethnic" seems not only unwarranted but possibly misleading, for his-
torically it is surely true that the geographical and cultural entity of China
is a totality of convergently and divergently related localisms.
   The linkage of the larger semantic and intellectual foundations of "eth-
nography" (description of cultural deviations) with notions of "ethnicity"
(i.e. localism, subalternism) is fairly obvious from the perspective of
Western intellectual history, but seems to be ignored in the bulk of writing
about the issue of ethnicity and ethnicisms in China. The reason for this is
unclear, but it appears to contribute to a reluctance to construct and
maintain fidelity with a finite, if temporary, mode of analysis. There is
often a garbling of perspectives, sometimes produced at a rather elemen-
tary level--as already suggested--by failure to distinguish between the
concept of race (or ethnicity) and the purported phenomenon of race (or
ethnicity), and at a much more subtle level by a commingling of disci-
plinary discourses. Clifford Geertz has referred to this as the "blurring of
genres,"26 a kind of exchanging of analogies that as a healthy development
has introduced the habits of structuralism, deconstructionism, and sym-
bolic anthropology to a wide variety of disciplines in the humanities and
social sciences, but as an unhealthy development sometimes results in an
imposition of a dissonant disciplinary voice. An analogous case occurred,
perhaps, when Darwin's paradigm of genetic selection was analogized and
distorted in the philosophies of "social" Darwinism, which had also their
reflection in theories of race and ethnicity in the early twentieth centuries.
In the wake of structuralism, certainly, transformational analogies in the
social sciences have multiplied exponentially, and seem to bump against
each other in many discussions of ethnicity. As an example, the fact
might be considered that whether any scholar is inclined to recognize

26 See Geertz 1983. This is not to overlook the historical identity of sociological study with
historical study, or the natural affinities of all branches of anthropology, history and sociolo-
gy. The concern here is with levels and characters of discourse. For a very incisive overview
of the tensions and intentions of the work of Geertz and Sahlins, and their respective
significance for historians, see Biersack 1989:72-96.

16PamelaKyleCrossley

Manchu ethnicity depends upon a resolution of the disciplinary angle of
discourse. Did the Manchus ever constitute a race? The answer from any
discipline, in our time, would be no. But, did the Manchus ever think they
constituted a race? This is a question of social history, cultural history,
and cultural and symbolic anthropology. Any one of these analyses would
in all probability lead (by various routes) to a yes, though imposition of a
disciplinary voice denying the raciality of the Manchus would hardly be
consonant with the meaning of such a discussion. More pointedly, did the
Manchus of the very late imperial period, the Republican period and the
present day constitute a "minority nationality," an "ethnic group," or both?
The answer must surely vary with disciplinary perspective.
   It is unlikely that clarity in this particular regard can be achieved
without confronting an evident tendency to conflate "minority nationali-
ties" (shaoshu minzu) and "ethnic groups," or by implication the Chinese
and Western approaches to cultural variance. Apart from the particulars
of the vocabulary involved, modern Chinese, Soviet and Western concepts
seem to share several common ancestors, among them Lewis Henry Mor-
gan, who stimulated Friederich Engels in his theories of ethnogenesis and
the origins of the family, and who also contributed the conceptual infras-
tructure to Western work on Native Americans.27 Morgan's premisses on
a progressive cultural paradigm generally and upon the importance of
matriarchy, shamanism, clans (gens) and moieties in "primitive" societies
particularly remained hallmarks of nineteenth-century ethnology, and its
influence in the Imperial Academy at St. Petersburg (ancestor of Akademii
Nauk SSSR at present Leningrad) survived the fall of the Romanov
empire. It was in fact under the auspices of the Russian Academy of Sci-
ences (as it was then called) that Sergei Mikhailovitch Shirokogoroff, the
seminal ethnographer of the Tungusic peoples of Northeast Asia, pursued
his work in the 1910's and 1920's (before emigrating permanently to
Shanghai in 1923). It is possible that Shirokogoroff was responsible for
introducing ethnos as a technical term (for a people, as distinct from a
nation) to both Russian and Western ethnography.28 The criteria for
27See Morgan 1851 and 1871; Engles 1892; and Leacock 1972. Regina E. Holloway argues
that contemporary Soviet ethnology has also been influenced heavily by Morgan, as well as
by the work of Robert Redfield and Fredrik Barth, see Holloway 1978. For a modernist in-
terpretation of Morgan see Thomas R. Trautmann 1987.
28Yu V. (Julius) Bromley, on the basis of his reading of Wilhelm Mühlmann's Rassen, Eth-
nien, Kulturen (Berlin, 1964), concluded that Shirokogoroff was personally responsible for the
introduction of ethnos as a technical term to Western ethnography. See Holloway and Am-
tiunov 1978. The claim, which is very tempting for those of us in Northeastern studies to
credit, has been vaguely corroborated by Dragadze 1980. As works relevant to China and
directly influenced by ShirokogorofFs ethnology (and thus indirectly by Morgan) 1 would note
Chen Wenshi ("The Creation of the Manchu Niru"); Ling Chunsheng (Songhuajiang xiayou
di hezhe zu); and Franz Michael (The Origin of Manchu Rule in China), who considered

Thinking About Ethnicity in Early Modern China1 7

definition of peoples had developed little since Morgan's time. Language,
religion, geographical distinctness and a common sense of community29
were the guidelines for determining the integrity of peoples.30
   Official policy toward minorities in the People's Republic was promul-
gated in 1956, and given a public debut in August in an article penned by
Fei Xiaotong and Lin Yuehua in the "People's Daily," in which essentially
the same criteria, minus religion, pertained.31 Under Marxist-Leninist-
Stalinist (these three levels of ideological elaboration being well known to
be contradictory and irreconcilable on the questions of ethnicity and
nationality) imbrications of these principles, contemporary Chinese ethnol-
ogists distinguish primitive, slave, and feudal levels of development among
the "minority nationalities" of China. To permit these peoples to progress
at their own rate, the Chinese state has implemented a virtual (though not
monolithic) homelands policy, mandating spatial as well as social and

ShirokogorofFs views (on clans in Manchu society) to be so conventional in 1942 that he
called them "traditional."  Most Qing specialists are familiar with ShirokogorofFs Social Or-
ganization of the Manchus, but should also note, among translations into English, Social Or-
ganization of the Northern Tunguz (1929) and Ethnical Unit and Milieu (1924), his treatise
on ethnic cohesion.
29This element was later represented in Japanese kyòydòtai, which has become contemporary
Chinese academic gongtongti, that immaterial (but materially derived) something that pro-
vides communities with a sense of their community-ness. On the comparison of gongtongti
elements for minzu and for natsiya, see Zeng 1987. Gongtongti has obvious affinities with
some aspects of Ibn Khaldûn's asabiyya, which has been much analyzed (for a recent over-
view see Baali 1988:43-52. Ibn Khaldûn was, by the way, a strong primordialist, whose argu-
ments anticipated those of Van den Berghe by nearly 600 years.
30Compare to the most recent definition of ethnos offered by Bromley and Kozlov (cited by
Dragadze 1980:162) "Ethnos... can be defined as a firm aggregate of people, historically esta-
blished on a given territory, possessing in common relatively stable particularities of language
and culture, also recognizing their unity and difFerence from other similar formations (self-
awareness) and expressing this in a self-appointed name." Interestingingly, this retains the
ethnonymic criterion, which had been emphasized from Morgan to Shirokogoroflf, but was
degraded somewhat in later thinking. The problem of ethnonyms is very difficult for anyone
working in early modern China, but for a discussion by a scholar with some feeling for this
see Isaacs 1974.
31The criteria for identifying minority nationalities was later given various academic expres-
sions, among them a series of articles, the lead authored by Fan 1957. Fan and G. Efimov
later collaborated with Yang Zeyi in an essay that laid out the major formula as follows:
common language, common territory, common economic life, common "psychological ele-
ments" (gongtong xinli suzhi--see also notes 13 and 24) as manifested in a common culture.
See "Guanyu Han minzu xingcheng wenti de yixie yijian" :85.
   The definitive English-language work on Chinese nationalities policy remains, of course,
Dreyer 1976, but see also Heberer 1989, and for the history of the northern minorities indivi-
dually an important reference source is Schwarz 1984. The period of the appearance of Fei
and Lin's article was critical, as the Chinese Communist Party moved toward more radical
social policies and hoped to "clarify" its position on nationalities (as well as intellectuals and
the bourgeoisie). Clarifications did not in fact result, and the next year Fei was forced to
make a public self-criticism and the publication of Minzu yanjiu was suspended, partly over
the issue of the causes and substance of culture and consciousness. On ideological tensions in
the party's position see Dreyer 1976:43-92. On the ideological question in particular, see
Moseley 1966. On the background to Fei and Lin's 1956 essay see Moseley 1966:21-22.

18PamelaKyleCrossley

cultural remoteness for a finite selection of peoples. It is difficult, under
Marxist theory, to conceive of a "socialist minority," since socialism super-
sedes culture and achievement of socialism would presumably mean total
integration with the greater society and extinction as an identifiable
"minority." The theory (clearer in Marx' formulations, more murky in
those of Lenin and Stalin) is that such peoples will indeed converge with a
state of socialism, and not remain irremediably marginal or indelibly
separate. Until then, ethnic sentiment (minzu ganqing) under the current
ideology is--like nationalism--a manifestation of false consciousness, a
remnant feudal mentality.32
   The Marxist prescription for minority status in China is, of course,
somewhat at odds with both the Leninist identification of some minorities
with victims of imperialism in need of dignity, equality and autonomy,
and with the actual history of the political relationships between the
modern Chinese state and certain peoples.                      The Soviet Union, where
roughly fifty percent of the population was recognized as minority
nationalities at the time of the October Revolution, faced policy issues in
this regard from its beginning. In China, where roughly six percent of the
population may have been minorities at the same period (comparable to
the present proportion), policies on minority nationalities were amplified
in importance because of the local flavor of the CCP bases in the 1930s.
The decades of guerilla fighting necessary to secure the People's Republic
made the Party beholden to many of the peoples of the southwest,
northwest, Mongolia and the Northeast, some of whom were enfranchised
as early as the promulgation of the constitution of the first soviet republic
in Jiangxi.33 The state still makes many efforts to demonstrate its goodwill
32It is very important to note the subtleties and innovations that Chinese scholars have intro-
duced into official simplicities of this question. See for instance Alatan's defense both of the
importance of nationalities studies and of the stability of national identities in "Lun minzu
wenti de hanyi." See Altan 1986. A sampling of the personal views of leading scholars was
also presented in a continuing symposium series in issues 4, 5 and 6 of the 1986 volume of
Minzu yanjiu.
33On early CCP policy toward minorities see Dreyer 1976:63-92. The text of the 1931 resolu-
tion on minority nationalities at Ruijin is reprinted in Moseley 1934:163-167. A historical
perspective on this period with respect to the policy of autonomous regions is also rendered
in Li 1983. Li Weihan, who was the head of the United Front Work Department from the
Yan'an period until 1965 when he was dismissed on grounds of "capitulationism," returned to
the public scene with the publication of Xizang minzu jiefang de daolu in 1981. The 1981:1
issue of Minzu yanjiu applauded his accumulated theoretical insights into the social and
economic advancement of minority nationalities. The period of Li's early work with the
CCP coincided with the work of Fei Xiaotong among the Yao, and both men's early contri-
butions are framed by the Party's dependence upon the local people of the border regions
where the revolution was first consolidated.

Thinking About Ethnicity in Early Modern China19

toward "minority nationalities" and at the present time rewards those who
successfully claim minority status with marginal benefits in family growth,
education and some economic policies. Propagandists, educators and scho-
lars observe the corollary policy of "nationalities unity" (minzu tuanjie),
which mandates both a simplistically "positive" attitude in the popular
media and a ruthlessly "negative" scholarly review of nationalities his-
tory.34
   Though China had its own ethnological traditions before the nineteenth
century, the modern ethnological discourse in China is based upon
imported vocabulary and methodology. Among the importations is the
term minzu, whose usage has not yet been traced earlier than 1895.35 It is
well known that minzu is the Chinese equivalent of the Japanese neolo-
gism minzoku. The intimacy the word enjoyed with its classical Chinese
etymons min and zu could be debated. It is worth noting, however, that
in the classical corpus min conveys no notion other than the common
people, or people at large, and in Qing usage--the immediate reference for
the framing of Chinese nationalist rhetoric--the word is nearly identical
with "civilians," or "the non-banner population," (e.g. hanmiri), all of which
corroborates Charlotte Furth's suggestion that minzu itself was not
intended to indicate minority peoples, but majority peoples (the "nation"
of the nation-state, e.g. the (han) Chinese of China)--possibly with refer-
ence to Herrenvolk.36 It is important to appreciate also that the term zu
34On the policy implications of "nationalities unity" in China see also comments in Crossley
1990:218. A rather vivid example of the resentments caused by the inherently negative scho-
larly assessments to which any minority in China may be subjected is contained in the essay
of Cheng and Pan 1986. They object particularly to the three criteria for critical assessment
of Jungar history, to wit:   1) whether they have objectively advanced nationalities unity and
the national integrity (of China), 2) whether they have advanced their own social (i,.e. social-
istic) development, and 3) whether they have advanced resistance to and struggle against
foreign aggression and influence" (see :47). Though Cheng and Pan were constrained from
saying so, it in fact hardly needs to be said that a people who had successfully maintained an
independent culture or even statehood for any period of time would have violated all of these
criteria. In the case of the Jungars, their vigorous resistance of Ming domination and of Qing
domination until 1696 clearly did not advance nationalities unity, their attempts to pursue
their traditional steppe economic occupations thereafter did not advance themselves socialisti-
cally, and their interest in a separatist movement under Japanese encouragement in the early
twentieth century did not advance resistance to foreign aggression. Unable to repudiate the
absurd pretensions to "objectivity" of this discourse (since a nationality that behaves as one
must be judged harshly for it under this logic), Cheng and Pan argue instead for more Uberai
interpretation of the criteria, pointing to the "contributions" of Jungars to the economic
development of Xinjiang in the eighteenth century.
35See Crossley 1990:185,271; Han and Li 1984; and Li 1963. A very comprehensive survey
of the foreign referents of minzu and its changing connotations is found in Wang 1983.
36See Fürth 1976.

20PamelaKyleCrossley

has evolved from a non-ascriptive, non-taxonomic word of generalized
meaning to an ascriptive, taxonomic word of highly specialized meaning,
in a trajectory remarkably close to that of ethnos--a reminder of the rela-
tively late advent of heritable vertical (national, ethnic), as opposed to hor-
izontal (class, caste) identities. In origin zu did not mean a lineage, and
was not connected to terms like xing or shi. It indicated a small group of
people within a locality or a larger organization, and over time acquired
the sense of kinship.37 In the Qing era it appears that some attempt at
greater precision in application of the word arose, and zu became the pre-
ferred term (in place of bu, guo or dang) for established, historical peoples,
especially of the Northeast. This sense of identity through racial (genea-
logical) descent was important to the Qing court of the eighteenth century,
which used a novel but wide-ranging conceptualization of lineage-based
groups in the Northeast related by ancestral descent, and culminating in
the rise of the Manchus.                 The result was thickly documented and
glamorous histories of certain of the empires' peoples, which were in turn
important in their development of ethnic identity and personal identity at
the end of the empire.38 Contemporary Chinese ethnologists, finally, argue
that despite the Japanese origin of the term minzu its true cognate is Rus-
sian narod, "people," "nation," with an emphasis upon "popular" (narodni)
and "nationality" (narodnost); this suggests again the sense of nationality,
not ethnicity, that was carried by Japanese minzoku, which was strongly
associated with a populist, nativist discourse in early modern Japan.39 In
combination with shaoshu, minzu renders quite neatly as "minority
nationality"--its meaning significantly subverted in its frequent English
transposition as "national minorities"--and encapsulates the Marxist-
Leninist rebuff of the ideology behind ethnicity in the West.40
37Zu's career as a signifier not only paralleled ethnos, but also Manchu rriukun, which for the
pre-conquest period indicated a group of people (or objects) living or moving together, and
only at length connoted consanguinity. For further comment see Crossley 1990:34-36.
Perhaps the best discussion in Chinese of diachronic evolutions in the significations of zu and
minzu is Peng 1985; for origins of zu as discussed above, see :5-6.
38For Manchus, these have been discussed in "Manzhou yuanliu kao and the Formalization
of the Manchu Heritage." It is important to note that the structure of the Qing imperium
does not allow Manchus or Mongols to be characterized as ethnies, since they were in fact the
core of the imperial hierarchy. The peoples of southwest and south China, on the other
hand, fit the classic definition of ethnies for both the Ming and the Qing periods.
39See Harootunian 1988:405-6, 413-439.
40This emphasizes the tension between minzu and ethnos (and by extension "ethnic group"),
since Soviet ethnologists use ethnos as a technical term and do not equate it with the techni- ,
cal term for "nation" (natsiya). This tension has been explored in some depth in Li 1987.
For a summary in English of recent Soviet ethnological writing, see Holloway and Arutiunov
1978. Chinese as yet has no technical term for ethnos, or for nation, and thus minzu plays
many contradictory roles in academic and popular writing, a fact frequently lamented by
spokesmen in the field--for an interesting glimpse of the difficulties presented during a for-
mative period in Chinese terminology, see the translator's note to an essay by G. Efimov in

Thinking About Ethnicity in Early Modern China21

   Points of agreement and of contrast between "ethnic group" and "minor-
ity nationality" have not been well elucidated by theorists or scholars in
the China field. After Morgan there were some sharp divergences in the
ethnological traditions of Marxism-Leninism and those of Western struc-
turalists. Though sharing an intellectual ancestor in Morgan, the Nauka
tradition, if one may call it that, in China has leaped over the insights that
have built the modern Western approach to ethnography: Lévi-Strauss's
and Marcel Mauss's conception of communities as defined through their
media of exchange (symbolic and affective, as well as physical) and the
later contributions of Clifford Geertz, Marshall Sahlins, Antonio Gramsci
and Hayden White on social ideologies and dynamic hierarchies have been
fundamental in shaping a contemporary discourse on kinship, community,
nationality and ethnicity. They also establish the structural dynamics and
historical significance of the relationship of the emergence of ethnic
consciousness--the primary factor in the formation of "ethnic groups"--
and modernity. Such considerations are often not integrated with discus-
sions of topics in Chinese ethnography. The fracturing of our analysis
through the confusion of shaoshu minzu and "ethnic groups" leaves us
dissatisfied with our ability to be precise about China's social and cultural
experience, and sometimes unable to link our analyses with historians
specializing in other regions. Ethnicity as a construct has not been closely
examined, the arbitrary fundaments of its composition have rarely been
acknowledged as such, and the validity of its imposition upon China stu-
dies has not been seriously questioned or seriously defended.
   Acceptance of the putative reality of ethnic phenomena in China must
derive at least in part from the strongly objectivist flavor of virtually all
Chinese writing on cultural variety. The discourse of "construction" has as
yet no correspondence in the "national minorities" policies of the People's
Republic of China, where it is expected that qualities of minority national-
ities can be objectively classified and the validity of minority claims medi-
ated by experts (that is, anthropologists, who apparently see no tension
between their roles as constructors of ethnic criteria and as discovers of
ethnic phenomena). The ostensible criteria resemble the traditional ones
of the Morgan-Engels tradition: language, religion, economic life, and
consciousness.41 Yet the external criteria of these minority nationalities

which an awkward explanation for the rendering of Kitaiskaya natsiya as hanzu is given
("Lun Zhongguo minzu de xingcheng" in Han minzu xingcheng wenti taolun ji :228). For a
thorough inquiry regarding the relationship of narodnost and natsiya to minzu, see He 1983.
41 Compare with another contemporary Soviet definition of ethnos: "stable human communi-
ties tied together by unity of territory and history of their formation, and by a common
language and culture." See Holloway and Arutiunov 1978:12.

22PamelaKyleCrossley

are found, upon close examination, to be possibly as ambiguous, as inter-
nally compromised as those of "race" had ever been. And while there is
every reason to distinguish "minority nationality" and "ethnic group" as
concepts, this should not obscure the apparent truth that many peoples in
China may satisfy both "minority nationality" and "ethnic group" criteria.
   Language, surely, is at once the most monumental and most superficial
of the criteria used to distinguish either minority nationalities or ethnic
groups.42 Its charm lies in its obviousness and its romance. It is certainly
a legacy of "sinicization," too, since virtually the only criterion for deter-
mining the degree of "sinicization" of alien dynasties was a rather quantita-
tive approach to language use. Recent studies of the imperial institution
tend to obviate this criterion, since the ritual and bureaucratic (not always
to be adroitly distinguished) uses of Chinese would be an unavoidable
byproduct of cooptation of the imperial institution by an "alien" force:
The cultural nature of the imperial lineage or ruling elite, in other words,
is not necessarily reflected in the fact that the use of Chinese by the court
and bureaucracy may be encouraged or even forced. The perhaps greater
issue implied by but never possible to resolve in terms of sinicization was
authentic cultural transformation of populations--always in one direction,
that of hanhua.         Here, again, sinicization shows its archaicism. Manchus,
for instance, even as they became adamant about the reality and meaning
of Manchu identity, were indifferent to court attempts to impose Manchu
language upon them.43 But in some instances apart from the Manchus,
the superficiality of language as a marker of identity (leaving aside the
symbolic aspects of linguistic survival) was already recognized during the
Qing, quite naturally by those responsible for the actual forced assimila-
tion of border and aboriginal peoples. Chen Hongmou (1696-1771), for
instance, in his design of cultural policies for the Miao of Guangxi and
Yunnan, had no thought that the teaching of Chinese to these people
would in and of itself subordinate them to Chinese norms; he made a spe-
cial policy point of the imposition of the Chinese family structure and its
ideology, which was a far more promising tool for cultural domination

42This was in fact appreciated by Morgan, who used as his criteria for the discovery of ances-
tral cultural relations not language, but what were in his view the more profound traits of kin-
ship structure. Nevertheless, for national minorities (as contrasted to ethnic groups) linguistic
distinctness continues, in theory perhaps more than practice, to be a sine qua non. See Ma
and Dai 1983.
43As a shaoshu minzu, however, modern Manchu descendants have again championed the
language rejected by their ancestors, which to me demonstrates their claim to ethnic cons-
ciousness, which is perhaps much stronger than their claim to "minority nationality" status.
See also Crossley 1990:218-219.

Thinking About Ethnicity in Early Modern China23

than language alone could ever be.44 Chen pioneered a policy course later
adhered to by the CCP--and its chief policy theorist Li Weihan--of
thoroughgoing social and economic reconstruction of minority areas, with
or without exclusive Chinese language instruction, to advance integration
with the nation at large.
  Language and religion intersect in the ascribed identity of the Hui. Their
definitive trait is that they are both Islamic and sinophone. It is not his-
torically the case that the Hui are uniformly of "Chinese" (han) origin, nor
is it any longer the case that they are uniformly religious; within the last
decade or so, genealogical criteria have been admitted into the politics of
ascription, which as Dru Gladney has shown has affected both the status
of several lineages in Fujian and has had an impact on total population
figures for minority nationalities.45 Interestingly, in forsaking even shakily
constructed cultural criteria and moving toward a genealogical policy, the
present government is repeating much of the patterning of the identity
policies of the Qing before it (only one of many points of affinity). As for
those Hui insisting upon a secular identity yet stressing the definitive links
with the past, they are following a strictly ethnic course, relying upon little
more than their consciousness of descent from the religious, state-
identified ethnos from whom they take their name. They thus resemble
not only identified "ethnic groups" of the West, but also the Manchus, with
whom they are with increasing frequency compared.
  It should be emphasized that it is the role of historical consciousness,
rather than history itself, that is of significance in the contemporary
minorities policy in China, and this particular element accords with the
understanding of "ethnic group" in the West. One speculates that if by a
form of mass hypnosis one could convince any group of any people in
China today that they were descendants of Lamaist followers of Dayan
Khan, the importance of that false historical conviction (and its social
effect) would be equal to that of a conviction based upon "fact." The
power of historical consciousness, regardless of its objective validity, has
already been noted in the case of the Manchus. In a very different type of
example, early Mongols and many of their predecessors on the steppe
defined themselves at least in part by a fervent belief that they were des-
cended from the union of a wolf and a doe.                    It is the construction

44I owe my notice of Chen in this context to ongoing work by Rowe 1989 on Chen's role in
administration and education in the southwest. The present interpretation of Chen's policies
should not, however, be charged against Rowe himself.
45See Gladney 1987:499.

24PamelaKyleCrossley

(including mythologizing) of the past, not the past itself, that is at work in
the formation of the modern "ethnic group," and nationalities policy in
China has also ratified the concept. It being false that ethnicity demands
any "objective" criteria to manifest itself as a social force, the historical
importance of ethnicity is found primarily in its cultural, social and politi-
cal impact.
   The formation of the nationality called Mongols is an instructive case in
modern reworking of traditional contours. In the late imperial period in
China, many peoples of Inner Asia and Central Asia could claim descent
or partial descent from the Mongols of the time of Chinggis Khan. In
Chinggis's own time and shortly after, of course, many Turkic-speaking
groups had been subsumed under the Mongol nationality, so that in Ming
and Qing times the referent was Chinggis Khan and the four "lineages"
that had emerged during the empire; "Turkic" and "Mongolian" are retros-
pective taxons of modern scholarship. It is doubtful, moreover, that a
monolithic Mongolian identity or consciousness of such identity for the
Qing period can be demonstrated. The Qing histories carry a very complex
nomenclature for various groups that modern scholars construct as
"Mongols."46 In a corollary of the Qing policy of fragmenting Mongol
federations and tribal (aimagh) units into progressively smaller portions,
the names and divisions multiplied. Many of these peoples were not con-
sidered Mongols (though most of them were speakers of Mongolian) by
the Qing court, which reserved the term for those incorporated into the
Eight Banners either before the conquest or during the campaigns of the
Kangxi emperor in the late seventeenth century, and broadly divided them
from the Khalkha, who were incorporated in 1691, and the Oirats (Jun-
gars, Kalmyks) not completely subjugated until the middle eighteenth cen-
tury.47 In the twentieth century, the group called "Mongols" has been
reconstructed not along the lines of historical affiliation generally observed
during the Qing, but along anthropologically-affirmed lines of language
and geography. The Mongols proper embrace a much broader collection

46The large divisions of the Qing period were already represented in the Ming records. Qing
usage is summarized in Qingshi gao, where the peoples of parts of Mongolia and Xinjiang are
not called Mongols at all (that was reserved for bannermen and the incorporated Chahar and
Khalkha) but fanbu (dependent tribes), of which there are 38 (Qingshi gao, Peking: Renmin,
1977 .14319-14528). One notes in contemporary historiography in China a tendency to write
the history of Qing groups (particularly the Jungars and Turgots), rather than histories of the
"Mongols." This may be a function of the documentation.
47This includes the Kharchin Mongols, as well as the Chahar Mongols who had been
affiliated with Ligdan Khan until his death in 1634 and were thereafter absorbed by the Qing
Eight Banners. See also Bawden 1968, 1989:81-186; Bayan 1958; and Ramsey 1987:198-206.

Thinking About Ethnicity in Early Modern China25

of groups than would have been admitted under Qing nomenclature, gen-
erally including all Khalkha and Oirat (and closely related dialects) speak-
ers of Inner Mongolia, the Northeast, Xinjiang, Gansu, Qinghai, Yunnan
and Sichuan. The Dongxiang (autonym Santa), Tu (autonym Monguor),
and Bonan (Bao'an), all of whom seem to have been separated from the
main branch of Mongols in the Yuan-Ming period and whose dialects
diverge significantly from Mongolian, are classed separately; the Dagurs,
who speak what is apparently a very archaic form of Mongolian, are also
separate.
   The modern reconstruction of historical identities is a reminder that
modes of taxonomy are historically determined, in the present as much as
in the past. One may question, at many points, why ethnicity may be
chosen as a primary analytical concept when other taxonomies are at hand
and may readily suggest themselves. As a cultural ideation, ethnicity may
be easily seen as a variant of the alienizing processes most, perhaps all,
societies have manifested, with great intensity at some periods. Ethno-
genesis, in other words, remains completely incomprehensible within the
terms of the present ethnic discourse of China studies, since ethnicity is
often accorded the place of cause rather than effect. Yet placing ethnic
conflict within the context of the great variety of inter-group dynamics
(not all of them hostile) may be corrective. Inter-group, or "communal,"
violence (fenlei xiedou) sometimes follows the contours of strict ethnic
marking, but it is more comprehensive to state that ethnicization--or
alienization--takes forms not always acknowledged by our own use of
"ethnicity."48 Anti-Semitism in early modern Europe is, perhaps, a useful
example, since the process of alienization of Jews was characterized by
ascription to them of alien practices, alien beliefs, alien genealogies and
alien "racial" characteristics.49 And it is worth noting that Jews had little
personal choice regarding the imposition of these alienizing characteristics
upon them. The persecution of Jews, motivated by fundamental social
dynamics having little, sometimes nothing at all, to do with Jews them-
selves and certainly nothing to do with the particular characteristics
ascribed to them, was preceded by their alienization. But scholars of

48For an attempt to construct a theory of ethnicization as both externally and internally ca-
talyzed, see Sarna 1978.
49The debate over Jewish raciality continued until a remarkably late date; Raphael Patai and
Jennifer Patai Wing, for example, felt it necessary to attack the idea as late as 1975, resulting
in a very trenchant discussion of racial thinking and its implications not only for anti-
Semitism but also the historical prejudice against Africans. See Patai and Wing 1975:5-9,
11-18.

26PamelaKyleCrossley


European history would be surprised to find us calling anti-Semitism "eth-
nic conflict." Historians of modern China should be in an especially good
position to understand this, since a similar alienization happened to intel-
lectuals and certain other groups in the Cultural Revolution, when criteria
that in any other context would appear suspiciously "ethnic"--accusations
that "monsters" and "freaks" were descended from evil sources (and that
the evidence of this could be detected even in their bones and ligaments),
practiced secret communications, sometimes in secret (foreign) languages,
dressed, worshipped, even walked and talked differently from the "people,"
and genetically transmitted their evils to future generations--were applied
to a group being alienized for altogether different reasons.50 Ethnicization
(which appears to bracket both alienization and personal internalization of
the alienizing process) is a subset of these alienizations, and shares many
evident traits with them. Ethnic consciousness has not been made an
object of analysis in the three essays here, but has been taken rather
unskeptically as a tool in analysis of social conflict--to lesser degree by
Ownby, to greater degree by Elliott, and to qualified degree by Harrell,
who might use this piece as a prelude to his Ploughshare Village, plotting
the thinning and eventual disappearance of ethnic violence as a "typology"
within a single discrete area.51 This despite the presence of communal
dynamics (not necessarily the same thing as ethnicity) as a plausible alter-
native to ethnicity as a cause (not an effect), as suggested by both Ownby
and Harrell. Indeed, Ownby's conclusion on "levels of violence" suggests
that ethnic formulations were, at best, of second-order importance in the
escalation of violence. The exact place of ethnic consciousness in the
causal chain of disorder in Qing Taiwan (and, by implication, southeast
China) is not resolved, and clearly is not intended to be resolved, in
Ownby's highly textured account.52
  In sum, the questions now plaguing historical ethnic studies of China
seem to cluster into the following themes. As suggested above, the reality
or significance of ethnic phenomena are not self-evident. Concepts of
belonging and alienization change in any culture over time, and this
applies not only to the past as an object of study but to academic
discourse in the present. Nor is "ethnicity" as a historical problem sui

50On the particular importance of labelling in the structure of social violence see most re-
cently White III, 1989.
51See Harrell 1982:134-149.
52Alternatives (not only as the causes of violence but as the causes of "ethnicity") are also
suggested by the typologies of violence discussed in the introduction to Lipman and Harrell
1990.

Thinking About Ethnicity in Early Modern China27

generis; rather, it appears to be a function of hierarchical dynamics in cul-
turally complex systems. The legitimation of the concept of ethnic iden-
tity, its imposition upon select groups, and its internalization by individu-
als are products of an imperial culture.53 The absolute importance of the
imperial form for the imposition of taxonomies and refinement of identity
criteria is central. More important, the placing of ethnicity within the
context of imperialism (not merely imperialist incursion by Westerners,
but the refinement of the imperial tradition within China itself) helps
create a chronological horizon for the emergence of ethnic consciousness.
In China, as elsewhere, ethnic consciousness--to be distinguished from
"ethnicity" in the classic sense--was a product of imperial disintegration,
and thus is a phenomenon of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. It is
a corollary of whatever we may understand as China's "modernization."
Finally, the distinction between ethnic studies proper and inter-ethnic
dynamics must be emphasized. The three studies in this issue are almost
exclusively concerned with inter-ethnic conflict, and questions of ethno-
genesis and ethnic identity as such have been left for other forums. This is
not to say that the authors wish to contribute to the unstated but widely
evinced assumption that ethnography within the China field is narrowly
limited to an external perspective--conflict between ethnic groups or ten-
sions between ethnies and nations--to the neglect of cultural texture of
any ethnic world.
   It might also be said that more insight may be required into the degree
to which racial and/or ethnic sensibilities shaped quotidian life in China in
the eighteenth, nineteenth and twentieth centuries. This is one of many
questions raised by Mark Elliott's "Bannerman and Townsman: Ethnic
Tension in Nineteenth-Century Jiangnan." Specifically, the rather pro-
found problem of the chronological horizon for ethnic consciousness in
the disintegrating Qing empire is introduced. Attached is the issue of
whether China generally was a society riddled with ethnic or "racial" ten-
sions before the Opium War. The threshold for the crystallization and
articulation of ethnic hostilities in China has previously appeared to be the
Taiping War, at least from the perspective of local tensions. Established

53 This is to say that in a polity that had somehow realized pluralism without imperialism--
absolute equality among culturally disparate groups, with no hegemonic status for a select
group or groups--there would be no ethnies or ethnic groups, only "nationalities," which very
clearly is the ideal embedded in Marxist-Leninist terminology (narod, minzu). The theory of
culturally multiplex societies has been explored by Western thinkers on ethnicity, and the
ideal of coexisting nationalities has been called "consociationalism." See particularly Lijphart
1977.

28PamelaKyleCrossley

explanations for the appeal of early Taiping proselytizing have depended
upon Hakka/Bendi rivalries in Guangxi, and the hostility of the Chinese
elite to the Taipings has been dissected not in terms of inter-ethnic rival-
ries but certainly within a discourse common to ethnography--the Confu-
cian Weltanschauung of the elite opposed by the ethnicized iconoclasm of
the Taiping leaders. Furthermore, the war is an obvious watershed because
of the explicitness of the racial rhetoric adopted by Taiping leaders in the
later phase of the war; terminology that would later be adopted by the
empire's ethnic groups may first have appeared in the internal communi-
cations of the Taipings, and the particular racial invective developed by
Taiping propagandists against the Manchus was vivid.
   The social effects in Jiangnan, particularly, were polarizing. The experi-
ences of the devastation of the garrisons at Nanjing and Hangzhou seem
to have reified, for a great many Manchus, much of the court's stately--
but previously ineffective--rhetoric on the Manchu difference. Taiping
slaughter of the Manchu populations was accompanied by an incendiary
polemic of supernatural racial confrontation, and even those, like Li
Xiucheng, claiming to have a mild disposition toward the Manchus
insisted that the alien occupiers should return "home."54 It is possible that
many Manchus began to take seriously the idea of themselves as a race at
this time, but ethnic consciousness, for the Manchus, did not dawn until
the conclusion of the war, when a bankrupt court could not fulfill the
economic role it had once played with respect to the garrison communi-
ties. The internal coherence that allowed the communities to attempt to
press their interests against the inertia of the post-war bureaucracy, to par-
tially rebuild on their own resources, and to adhere to banner identity
when most compulsions and incentives to do so had eroded, adumbrated
the emergence of the Manchus as an "ethnic group" at the end of the
dynasty. The historical origins of ethnic discretion--the ability of an indi-
vidual or community to make choices reinforcing or attenuating cultural
differences from the nation--in China lie in the Taiping War, because of
the profound damage it inflicted upon the instruments by which the Qing
state had previously identified and administered the peoples under its rule.
   Elliott's essay demands consideration of whether or not the behavior of
the Manchu commander Hailing at Zhenjiang was controlled not merely
by the realistic fear of opportunistic traitors among the Chinese civilian
population, but also by a knowledge that Man/Han relations throughout
the empire were poor and would intensify the volatility of the situation at

54 See Crossley 1990:126-127, 26ln25.

Thinking About Ethnicity in Early Modern China29

Zhenjiang. Secondary questions concerning Hailing's own hostility toward
Chinese civilians also arise. The theme of internal enemies is a classic one
in Opium War studies,55 but has never been extensively and conclusively
explored. Ultimately, the viability of Elliott's argument will reflect upon
issues of the degree to which pre-Taiping China was a "racist" or ethnically
troubled society and the extent to which this may have undermined the
country's need to meet extraordinary military challenges in the middle
nineteenth century. Certainly, since Manchu concern with the danger of
internal traitors did not arise with the Opium War but was endemic to the
history of Qing conquest and occupation of China, the theme presumably
has the potential of reviving earlier theses on the influence of Man/Han
hostilities over the political process and over society.
   Finally, one moves from questions of identity and inter-group dynamics
among people easily identified as not han--in the late Qing sense--to the
still more complex issue of ethnicity among the group who are easily
identified as han. The importance of Harrell's essay for the historian is
striking.   If his demonstration of a decline in ethnic consciousness in
Taiwan in the very late nineteenth century could be shown to be applica-
ble to China generally in the same period, the implications for modern
Chinese history would be profound. Chinese nationalist rhetoric in the
last three decades of the Qing empire has generally been characterized as a
rhetorical and political movement of select elites, with an occasional coin-
cidence of interests with volatile but ideologically inert popular groups.
Harrell's model of ethnicity declining in direct relationship to emerging
national consciousness, if it could be widely confirmed on the basis of
local studies, suggests another way entirely of viewing the problem. If it
was true that a convergence of factors (including, as Harrell demonstrates
in his case study, foreign intrusion) led to a genuine diminution of ethni-
cism in the Chinese countryside, one would be forced to see the emer-
gence of a national cultural consciousness not as an attribute of the iso-
lated, educated elite but as an inexorable byproduct of widespread popular
cultural change in China--or at least in large portions of China, possibly
those most exposed to foreign (and by coincidence in this case moderniz-
ing) influences. The elite, in this scenario, would be articulating a secular
change that was in advance of them and independent of their leadership.
A multitude of questions arises with regard to this proposition, but if noth-
ing else it demonstrates again the intimate connections between sinology
55 See for instance Fairbank 1987; Wakeman, Jr. 1966:49-57; and Crossley 1990:104; 255-
256.

30PamelaKyleCrossley

and the conceit of a unified, literate, elite Chinese culture on the one
hand, and popular culture, localism, and ethnicity on the other.
  The dialogue between history and anthropology with respect to early
modern China will, one presumes, gain both momentum and depth in the
near future. The possibilities of historical ethnography already realized in
many excellent studies will be explored more widely.          Whether these
works will mutually challenge and nurture each other depends upon a
more concerted focus on the questions of the ethnic texture of Ming and
Qing society, some understanding of the diachronic contours of racial, eth-
nic and nationalistic consciousnesses in China, and some fairly close
analysis of episodes characterized as "ethnic" conflicts. The cases for ethni-
city and ethnic consciousness in early modern China can undoubtedly be
made, but the present emphasis upon inter-communal dynamics and
undifferentiated diagnosis of supposedly "ethnic" encounters may circum-
vent both scholarly exploration of the roots of ethnic consciousness and
the explicit foundations of contemporary ethnic discourse.        Skepticism
about the state of the field at present, however, does not entail pessimism
of the potential of the field and those working it. One speculates that the
boundaries of ethnicity in China will be found to be far more porous than
has previously been suggested, but no less historically significant for that.
The more such studies advance, it appears, the more rapid will be the
deterioration of sinological conceits lingering in our professional language.
Not a diminution, but a magnification, of the significance of China study
will likely result.
