James_feyrer
Economics
Global_Savings_and_Global_Investment
This paper examines the effect of exogenous shocks to savings on world
capital markets. Using the exogenous shocks to US tax policy identified by
Romer and Romer (2009b), we trace the impact of an exogenous shock to
savings through the income accounting identities of the US and the rest of
the world. We find that exogenous tax increases are only partially offset by
changes in private savings (Ricardian equivalence is not complete). We also
find that only a small amount of the resulting change in US saving is absorbed
by increased domestic investment (contrary to Feldstein and Horioka (1980)).
Almost half of the fiscal shock is transmitted abroad as an increase in the
US current account. Positive shocks to US savings generate current account
deficits and increases in investment in other countries in the world. We cannot
reject that the shock is uniformly transmitted across countries with different
currency regimes and different levels of development. The results suggest
highly integrated world capital markets with rapid adjustment. In short we
find that the US acts like a large open economy and the world acts like a
closed economy.
∗We thank seminar participants at Dartmouth College for helpful suggestions. We thank Daniel
Keum for research assistance and helpful conversations. All errors are the authors.
†
james.feyrer@dartmouth.edu, jay.shambaugh@dartmouth.edu, Dartmouth College, Department
of Economics, 6106 Rockefeller, Hanover, NH 03755-3514.
1Introduction
Recent discussions of a global savings glut suggest that a surge in savings in one
country can have impacts across the globe.1 We wish to examine what happens
when a dollar of savings is added to world capital markets. If we treat the world
as a closed economy, undergraduate macroeconomics suggests that an exogenous
increase in savings results in an increase in investment of equal size. Is this evident
in the data? Do all countries in the world see an increase in investment or are some
countries cut off from shocks to world capital markets?
In this paper we exploit a series of exogenous shocks to US fiscal policy identified
by Romer and Romer (2009b) as a starting point to examine the impact of a shock
to world savings. The Romer shocks are useful because they use analysis of the
legislative record to identify tax changes that were unrelated to contemporaneous
economic conditions. The path from a change in US tax policy to world savings
requires examining a number of interesting questions. Do US tax changes affect
aggregate savings in the US? Are changes in US savings exported abroad or does
all adjustment occur domestically?
The analysis in this paper is grounded in the national income accounting identities
of the United States and the rest of the world. By definition,
Y = C(Y − T) + I + G + CA (1)
where output, Y , is assumed to be determined by the natural rate of output, consumption,
C, is a function of disposable income, investment, I, is a function of
the interest rate in world capital markets, G is government spending, and CA is
the current account. Savings is what is left over after the private sector and the
government consume.
S = Y − C(Y − T) − G (2)
The relationship between the current account, saving, and investment is
CA = S − I. (3)
1See Bernanke (2007) for a discussion of the global savings glut hypothesis. The argument
posited that an oversupply of savings - particularly in Emerging Asia - helped generate a US
current account Deficit as the savings had to flow somewhere, and the US was the willing recipient
of the savings.
2We wish to trace the impact of exogenous changes in taxes through these accounting
identities. Equation (2) shows that a change to taxes will affect savings
through private consumption. If agents assume that tax changes are permanent,
standard models of consumption suggest that a tax increase will result in decreased
consumption and increased national savings.
Barro (1974) suggests that forward looking taxpayers take into account the government’s
long run budget constraint and therefore do not respond to tax changes
that are unaccompanied by changes in government spending.2 We will refer to this
private savings response as Ricardian Equivalence for the remainder of the paper.
If Ricardian equivalence holds perfectly, tax shocks will be perfectly absorbed by
changes to private savings and there will be no impact on national savings. Thus,
we need to test whether national savings in the US is affected by the tax shocks.
Second, are shocks to US national savings transmitted across borders? Equation
(3) shows that changes to savings must appear either as domestic investment shifts
or changes to the current account. Feldstein and Horioka (1980) find that savings
and investment tend to be highly correlated across countries.3
If US savings and
investment comove perfectly, the shock to US saving will be absorbed domestically
and not transmitted across the border.
These two questions combine to determine whether we observe “twin deficits.”
Are budget deficits linked with current account deficits? If we see an impact of US
tax shocks on the US current account, this signals that neither Ricardian equivalence
nor Feldstein-Horioka are fully operational and there is some truth to the view of
twin deficits.
Once we establish that exogenous shocks to US savings are transmitted abroad
through the US current account we can begin to take accounting identities seriously
at the world level. Barring trade with Mars, a shock to the US current account
must generate an equal and opposite shock to the aggregate current account of the
rest of the world. Equation (3) tells us that these current account shocks must be
accompanied by changes in saving or investment in the rest of the world.
We find that exogenous tax policy changes in the US have a significant impact on
2Also see Barro (1989). Ricardian Equivalence has generated a considerable literature since
Barro’s initial article. See Elmendorf and Mankiw (1999) and Seater (1993) for some details of the
debate.
3This result has been updated countless times. See Coakley, Kulasi and Smith (1998). Obstfeld
and Taylor (2005) note that the Feldstein and Horioka (1980) correlation has been falling since
1970.
3investment in other countries over the period 1973 to 2005. When the US changes
tax policy for exogenous reasons, a substantial amount of that change in policy
is transmitted through changes in the current account to the rest of the world.
When the US government saves more, private citizens do save somewhat less, but
the impact on national savings is still positive. Further, domestic investment has a
relatively small response to an exogenous fiscal shock, so the majority of the change
in savings turns into a change in net lending to or borrowing from the rest of the
world.
Fiscal shocks in the US act as shocks to world savings. The response of the
rest of the world to these shocks appears to be well described by the simple closed
economy relationship S=I. An exogenous shock to world savings results in higher
investment around the globe. While there is some suggestion that the magnitude
of the response varies across currency regimes or levels of development, we cannot
reject that all countries have identical responses to the shocks. Interestingly, the
magnitude of the response seems to be unrelated to standard measures of openness
to capital flows.
These results are consistent with a world where shocks to the world capital
market are transmitted to all countries and all countries share a similar elasticity of
investment with respect to the world interest rate. Every additional dollar of world
savings appears as an investment increase in each country in the world proportional
to their share of world GDP. This is consistent with short run equalization of capital
returns and is similar to the long run equalization to capital returns found in Caselli
and Feyrer (2007).
The results suggests that world capital markets are fluid and reach into all countries
in the world. Changes in saving in one country rapidly appear as investment
increases in all the rest of the countries in the globe. This is important for thinking
about the importance of East Asian savings over the last decade as well as for evaluating
the impact of the large fiscal policy changes currently occurring in the large
economies in the world.
1 Previous Literature
Much of the literature on fiscal policy transmission rightly focuses on the impact of
such policy on the country that engages in the fiscal changes. Such work has included
4looking at episodes of defense budget expansion (Ramey (2006), etc.) to examine the
impact of fiscal changes on consumption and wages. This work tends to find output
increases with a fiscal expansion, but consumption and real wages fall. Further
evidence is drawn from short run restriction identified vector autoregressions. This
work includes Blanchard and Perotti (2002), Perotti (2007), and Mountford and
Uhlig (2008). In this work, output rises with a positive fiscal shock, but so do real
wages and consumption. The recent debate on the impact of fiscal policy has often
focused on this disagreement.
In our work, we take the changes in tax policy identified by Romer and Romer
(2009b) as exogenous to current economic conditions to be our fiscal shocks. Romer
and Romer (2009b) focus on the changes over time for the economy as a whole as
well as for investment and other outcomes following a fiscal shock. They find that
tax increases which are purely exogenous to the economic setting are contractionary.
They focus on the dynamic response to tax shocks and see that GDP, Consumption
and Investment all fall in response to a tax increase, with the impact on Investment
building over time. In further work, they examine the response of govt expenditures
(Romer and Romer (2009a)). They find that even in the long run, government
expenditures do not respond strongly to changes in taxes - the starve the beast
hypothesis does not hold. This result is important in the context of our work in
that it suggests changes in government taxes are not simply offset by changes in
spending in which case there would have been no impact on government savings.
A number of studies have looked at the international transmission of fiscal shocks.
There are two main groups of this literature. First, some papers test the direct
impact of a fiscal shock in one country on the GDP of another’s. This literature is
testing the question of whether fiscal policy shocks can act as an “engine of growth”
for the rest of the world, or whether the shocks are primarily limited to the local
country (see B´enassy-Qu´er´e and Cimadomo (2006) and Arin and Koray (2005))
A second strand of the literature is more directly related to the twin deficit
concept. This literature also relies on accounting identities to show that changes
in government savings should lead to changes in the current account. Work using
calibrations tends to support this view, but recent time series econometric evidence
has failed to find such effects. In particular, both Kim and Roubini (2008) and
Corsetti and Muller (2008) argue they find evidence of twin divergence not twin
deficits. That is, they find that fiscal shocks identified through short run restrictions
5VARs (in the same manner as the bulk of the domestic literature) do not generate
twin deficits, instead, budget deficits lead to real exchange rate depreciations and
current account surpluses (or no impact). As Kim and Roubini (2008) note, the
change in government savings appears to go both to changes in private savings
and changes in investment (crowding out, consistent with Feldstein and Horioka
(1980)). Corsetti and Muller (2008) also examine evidence across countries to see if
the persistence of the shocks and openness of the economy affect the transmission.
They find that yes, such factors play a role and the US has relatively small levels of
international transmission of shocks based on its relatively closed economy.
Related work has considered both the twin deficits and global savings glut arguments.
Chinn and Ito (2007) and Gruber and Kamin (2007) have explored the
broader determinants of current accounts. Both use panel analysis to determine
the root determinants of countries’ current account to GDP ratios. Chinn and Ito
(2007) are supportive of twin deficits, finding coefficients of between 0.2 and 0.5 on
the budget deficit. Gruber and Kamin (2007) find a coefficient of 0.09 on the fiscal
balance. Neither study has exogenous variation to identify the impact of a fiscal
change, but instead rely on cross-country differences. Also, both are examining
medium term determinants, using five year averages in the panel.
Given that savings in one country can affect investment in another and vice
versa, barring any exogenous variation, it is difficult for these studies to directly
estimate a global savings glut relationship. Instead, they look to see if East Asia
saves more than expected and the US less. Gruber and Kamin (2007) argue Asia
does save too much currently, but that this can be explained as a reaction to the
East Asian crisis. Chinn and Ito (2007) also argue there is too much savings in Asia
but note this does not appear to be due to a lack of financial development. Both
papers argue it is unclear why so much of this savings would flow to the US.
The results which are skeptical of twin deficits contrast with a finding in Romer
and Romer (2009b). At the end of their paper, Romer and Romer examine the
impact of a tax change on exports and imports. They find that exports increase
and imports decrease, which they view as consistent with a tax increase leading to
a drop in interest rates and hence reducing capital inflows. But, they argue, the
drop in imports may simply be more consistent with a fall in income rather than
any open economy effects.
We take this observation as a starting point to explore the impact of a change
6in government savings in one country on both the current account and investment
in other countries. Our paper is unique in bringing different evidence to bear than
most explorations of twin deficits: exogenous fiscal shocks matching actual policy
changes. We find that there is in fact evidence along the lines a twin deficit theory
would predict: changes in government savings are correlated with changes in the
current account. Thus, we can look at exogenous shocks to taxes in the United
States as exogenous shocks to savings available to the rest of the world. The next
section explains those shocks and how we examine the effects. We further expand
the literature by looking not just at the current account of the country with the
change, but also by examining where the increased savings goes around the world.
Thus, the paper makes an important contribution to the literature studying how
changes in savings in one country affect other countries.
2 Methodology
We borrow the shocks from Romer and Romer (2009b). The construction of the
shocks is described in more detail in Romer and Romer (2008). They use legislative
history to separate out tax changes that were made based on attempts to respond
to current economic situations from those that are exogenous to current economic
conditions. Such changes may be motivated by a desire to raise taxes in an effort
to restore long run budgetary balance or to cut taxes to lower marginal rates and
possibly spur long run economic growth. Crucially, the changes are not aimed
at smoothing short run business cycle fluctuations. Examples include changes in
social security tax rates aimed at long run balance, tax cuts motivated by a shift
in governing ideology, or tax increases aimed at long run budget balance. Romer
and Romer argue such changes are exogenous to current or anticipated economic
situations. There is, for example, no relationship between the shocks and lagged
GDP growth in the US (see Figure 1).
The exogeneity is crucial to the Romer and Romer examination of the domestic
effects of tax changes. It is also crucial to our investigation of the impact of those
changes on US savings, investment, and the current account. Even if one worries that
there is some component of endogeneity in these shocks, when we examine overseas
responses, the changes are even more clearly exogenous. The shocks are in no way
responses to changes in savings, investment, or general economic circumstances in
7Figure 1: Romer Fiscal shocks versus lagged GDP growth
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980 1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1990
1991
1993
1994
2000
2002
2003
2005
−.015 −.01 −.005 0 .005
Fiscal Shock
−.02 0 .02 .04 .06
L.dlgdpconstantlcu
other countries.
We limit ourselves to those shocks in the post Bretton Woods era of the international
economy. Our reason is that changes in the international financial architecture
over time arguably make looking at the international economic transmission prior
to that time less informative for more recent experiences. Further, we begin to lose
data on current accounts, investment, and other necessary variables for an increasing
number of countries as we expand back before the 1970’s. Thus our sample
runs from 1973 to 2005. For the regression on the current account, the dataset
is an unbalanced panel of 113 countries. The investment data is somewhat more
limiting with only 106 countries. For the current account, Kuwait has changes that
are greater than aggregate GDP for several years around the Gulf War. For this
reason, we exclude Kuwait from the data set.
We explore the impact of the Romer shocks on US variables, rest of world variables
summed together, and in panels for individual country/year observations. We
examine the data in terms of changes divided by GDP. That is, when we look at
the current account, we examine the change in the current account divided by the
previous year’s GDP. The advantage of scaling to GDP rather than simply using
raw dollar amounts and controlling for GDP is that when we turn to the effects
in other countries, we do not have to convert investment into a common currency.
8Instead, we can scale by local GDP.4
By using lagged GDP to scale the changes we are implicitly assuming that GDP
is unchanged by the shocks. Romer and Romer (2009b) find that the impact on
output is quite small in the first three quarters after the shock. Assuming no output
movement is therefore a reasonable assumption during the year of the tax change
which is our period of interest. More importantly, output effects are likely to bias
us against finding external effects of US tax changes. If output falls with a tax
increase, private savings should decrease such that national savings will increase by
less than if there were no output response. The same bias will hold for the impact
of the shocks on non US GDP, and foreign GDP is even less likely to respond to the
shocks than domestic GDP.5
The shocks themselves are in Billions of US dollars and are changes in tax policy.
That is, a permanent reduction in taxes by 100 Billion dollars in 1985 would show
up as a shock of -100 Billion in 1985 and zero thereafter. Thus, we are interested
in the change in the current account (or investment) in a given year. Romer and
Romer (2009b) typically use a dynamic specification examining the impact of policy
changes over time. We lack adequate quarterly data for many countries to exploit
their series higher frequency and use annual data, removing part of the interest in
fluctuations over time. More importantly, our view is that of an accounting identity.
We are curious where the changes in savings in a given year go. If the government
saves more in a given year, where does that money go in that given year. For ease
of comparison across countries and time, we scale the shocks as well as the changes
in the current account and investment by GDP.
3 Results
3.1 Aggregate Results
Figure 2 shows the crucial motivating fact. The bars represent the exogenous shocks
to US fiscal policy identified by Romer and Romer (2009b). The two lines show
4The current account data are in current dollars and the change is expressed as a percentage
of lagged current dollar GDP. Investment data are real dollars and the change is expressed as a
percentage of lagged real GDP. All data are from the World Bank World Development Indicators.
5
If GDP responds contemporaneously a US tax increase would reduce world aggregate demand
and drive down investment in the rest of the world. This would bias against finding that US tax
increases generate investment increases elsewhere.
9Figure 2: Changes in the US and Rest of World Current Accounts in Response to
US Fiscal Policy Shocks −.01 −.005 0 .005 .01
1970 1980 1990 2000 2010
year
US CA ROW CA
Shock
changes in the US current account and changes in the summation of the current
accounts for the rest of the world. In order to maintain consistency with the tables
in the rest of the paper, all changes and shocks are scaled to the level of non-US
world GDP. For the purpose of this graph, the important fact is that the relative
magnitudes are the same for the shock and for the current account changes.
Exogenous changes in US fiscal policy track reasonably closely with changes in
the size of the US current account. The simple correlation between the fiscal shocks
and changes to the US current account is 0.28. The correlation between the shocks
and changes to the rest of the world’s current account is -0.36. Trade with Mars
appears to play a small role and the correlation between the movements in the US
current account and the rest of the world’s current account is -0.76.
Table 1 illustrates the basic facts from Figure 2 more formally. We regress the
change in the current account divided by lagged GDP on the shock measured as
a percentage of GDP. The regressions are run with Newey-West standard errors to
control for possible serial correlation in the time series.6 For the current account,
6As it turns out Newey-West standard errors, heteroscedasticity robust standard errors, and
OLS estimated standard errors are all nearly identical. There is very little autocorrelation in either
10Table 1: The Effect of Exogenous Shocks to US Fiscal Policy on the Current Account
and Investment in the US and the Rest of the World (ROW)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
US CA US Inv ROW CA ROW CA ROW CA-IV
Fiscal Shock / US GDP 0.466* 0.166
(0.190) (0.327)
US CA -0.764** -1.260**
(0.132) (0.454)
Fiscal Shock / ROW GDP -0.643**
(0.217)
Constant 0.006*
(0.002)
Observations 32 29 32 32 32
R-squared 0.317
** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1
Standard errors corrected for serial correlation.
the expected change in any given time period is zero so a constant is omitted.
For investment, aggregate GDP growth causes growth over time, so a constant is
included.7 Equation (4) shows the simple estimating equation.
yt = α + β ∗ Shockt + ǫ (4)
What coefficients should we expect to see for the US regressions in Table 1? If
the US were a small open economy and government spending, private savings, and
investment within the US were completely unresponsive to exogenous fiscal shocks
we would expect these shocks to translate one for one into changes in the US current
account. This suggests that we should see a coefficient of one in column (1) and a
coefficient of zero in column (2).
However, for the response of investment we must remember that the US is not
a small open economy. In a typical year in our sample, US GDP is roughly 25%
of total world output. A substantial portion of the shock to US savings should
therefore show up in US investment even if there were no strong tendency of savings
and investment to move together (as suggested by Feldstein and Horioka (1980)).
In fact, if capital were perfectly mobile and all countries had identical elasticities
the shocks or the changes in the current account.
7Results including a constant in all regressions are available on request. The difference from
the reported results is quite small.
11of investment to movements in the common world interest rate, we would expect
the US investment increase to be proportional to the US share of world GDP.8
The benchmark for the coefficient in the investment regression should therefore be
roughly 0.25. This in turn suggests that the benchmark for the response of the
current account in column (1) is 0.75 rather than one.
Column (1) shows the response of the US current account to an exogenous fiscal
shock. The coefficient of 0.466 indicates that for every dollar increase in US taxes
collected, almost half moves to the rest of the world economy through an increase
in the US current account. Column (2) shows the response of US investment to the
fiscal shocks. For every 1 dollar increase in US taxes collected there is a 17 cent
increase in investment in the US.9
In neither case can we reject our benchmarks of 0.75 for the current account and
0.25 for investment. The investment coefficient is not precisely estimated, so the
confidence interval allows for some degree of saving-investment correlation along the
lines of Feldstein and Horioka. However, the point estimates suggest no effect. The
current account coefficient is somewhat less than 0.75 and the investment coefficient
suggests that this is not due to correlation between savings and investment. This is
consistent with some degree of Ricardian Equivalence. The point estimates suggest
that for every dollar of tax increase, about one third of the tax increase is offset by
a decrease in private savings. Of the remaining 67 cents, roughly 17 is invested in
the US and the rest, or roughly half the shock, is transmitted abroad.10
Columns (3) through (5) examine the response of the current account in the rest
of the world to shocks originating in the US. The left hand side in these regression
is the change in the sum of the value of the current accounts for all countries except
the US expressed as a percentage of aggregate GDP summed across all countries
except the US. In other words it is the change in the value of the non US current
account as a percentage of non US GDP.
In order to aid in interpreting the coefficients, the right hand side variables are
also scaled as a proportion of non US GDP. For example, Column (3) examines the
8This fact that savings and investment should be more highly correlated in large open economies
has been noted in the literature going back to Feldstein and Horioka (1980). See Coakley et al.
(1998) for a more complete discussion.
9Romer and Romer (2009b) find that a tax increase is coincident with a drop in investment
over time. The contemporaneous effect is close to zero. We are using data set only from 1973
forward at the annual frequency, so the slightly different result is not surprising.
10The 17 cents that show up as domestic investment is almost exactly 25 percent of the savings
change, matching the US share of world income.
12response of the rest of the world’s current account to changes in the US current
account. The change in the US current account is measured as a percentage of
non-US aggregate GDP. As long as the sum of the current accounts of all countries
in the world is zero (no trade with Mars) this coefficient should be exactly negative
one. If the US current account increases by 1 percent of non US GDP, we would
expect the non US current account to decrease by 1 percent as a percentage of non
US GDP. The actual estimate is -0.76. The coefficient is significantly different from
zero at the one percent level and is not significantly different from negative 1.
Column (4) examines the effect of the fiscal shock on the rest of the world’s
current account. The fiscal shock is also scaled as a percentage of non US GDP. In
this case we do not expect a coefficient of negative one since not all of the shock will
cross the US border. As we discuss above, the largest response (in absolute value)
that we expect to see is 0.75, and column (1) suggests that only half of the fiscal
shock appears as an increase in world savings. Assuming that column (1) is well
estimated and that there are no other effects of a US fiscal shock we should expect
the coefficient in column (4) to be negative and of the same size as the coefficient in
column (1). The estimate of -0.643 is larger in absolute value than the column (1)
estimate and smaller than our theoretical benchmark and insignificantly different
from neither. We can strongly reject a zero coefficient or no response.
Finally, we can use the fiscal shock as an instrument to establish that exogenous
changes in the US current account results in equal and opposite changes in the
current account in the rest of the world. Column (5) regresses the non US current
account response to a change in the US current account where the US current
account change in instrumented with the Romer and Romer exogenous fiscal shocks.
In this case, accounting identities would once again suggest a coefficient of negative
one. The point estimate is larger (in absolute value) than one, but unity is well
within the confidence interval, and once again, we can safely reject no effect.
The results of Table 1 suggest that exogenous shocks to US fiscal policy act as a
shock to world savings. There is a statistically significant and economically sensible
response of the rest of the world’s current account to a US tax law change. A one
dollar increase in US taxes results in a 47 cent shock to the US current account
representing an exogenous shock to world savings. This increase in world savings
shows up as a current account surplus for all other countries in the world.
133.2 Disaggregated Results
What impact does a increase in world savings have on a typical country? Suppose
that our benchmark is to think of the world as comprised of countries that rely on
a common pool of savings and respond to a common world interest rate. At the
world level, savings must equal investment, so shocks to world savings should result
in increased investment through lower world interest rates. As long as investment
decisions in individual countries are determined by the world interest rate, we should
expect to see all countries in the world respond to shocks to world savings. If we
further assume that countries borrow from abroad at the margin and share similar
elasticities of investment with regard to the world interest rate we should expect to
see a proportionally similar response across all countries. Even if countries insulate
themselves from the world interest rate to some extent via capital controls or have
different levels of nominal interest rates due to different inflation rates and expected
changes in exchange rates, as long as the shock to world savings and hence world
interest rates has an impact at the margin of their capital market, we should see
some response.
In the tables to follow we move from aggregate results to individual country
results. One advantage is to allow us to scale local investment by local GDP and
not have to sum investment across countries (which involves finding plausible internationally
comparable investment price indices). For the initial results, we include
results where observations are weighted by country size. In these cases, the regressions
are similar to the aggregated regressions from the previous section. This
has the advantage of scaling the coefficients to conform to the accounting identities
discussed earlier. A one dollar shock to the US current account should show up
as a one dollar shock to the rest of the world’s current account. The downside to
this approach is that the response of large countries will dominate the results. For
the non-weighted regressions each country is taken as an individual experiment, increasing
the power of the regressions. This will also allow us to examine sub-groups
of countries for differential responses. Do open countries respond to a world saving
shock differently than closed countries? Does the currency regime affect the
response to shocks? Do shocks differ over levels of development?
Table 2 shows the results from our country level regressions. Figures 3 and 4
show the corresponding partial scatterplots of the residual changes in the current
14account and investment versus the residual of the US fiscal shocks.11 The regression
equation being estimated is similar to equation (4) with the addition of country fixed
effects made possible by the panel structure of the data. The country level effects
are only included in the regressions on changes to investment. Because of GDP
growth, the change in investment as a percentage of GDP is positive on average and
will vary by country based on the growth rate of aggregate GDP. The country effects
control for this heterogeneity. In the case of the current account, our accounting
identities suggest that the expected growth rate for any arbitrary observation is
zero. In leaving out country effects and a constant we are essentially imposing
this moment condition on the current account regressions.12 In all cases standard
errors are clustered by year to account for the fact that the shock is identical for all
countries in any given year.13
yit = β ∗ Shockit + γi + ǫ (5)
As in Table 1 we expect a coefficient of between -0.47 and -0.75 on the current
account. If smaller countries typically respond more, the coefficient on the
unweighted regressions will tend to be larger, with the weighted regressions more
directly corresponding to the aggregated results.
The unweighted regression has a clearly larger coefficient and the size implies
that when the US increases taxes by one percent of world GDP, the typical country
sees a current account response in excess of one percent of its GDP, though one
percent is in the confidence interval. For the weighted regressions, the responses are
directly between -0.47 and -0.75 and -0.47 is well within the confidence interval. For
both the weighted and unweighted regressions, zero effect is strongly rejected.
The expected coefficient on investment is less certain. If we believe other countries
current accounts must respond to a change in the US current account simply
due to an adding up constraint, the open question is whether the change in the cur-
11The coefficients and significance levels do not change as we eliminate outliers to zoom in on a
more visible relationship in the bottom half of the figures.
12The results do not change substantially if we include a full set of country dummies. When
included, the estimate for the constant are small and typically insignificant.
13The other potential standard error complication is serial correlation. The aggregate results
suggest that this is not a significant issue. Clustering on the country level rather than the year
level yields much lower standard errors. Using multilevel clustering on both year and country (as
described in Cameron, Gelbach, Miller, Hall and Drive (2006)) yields standard errors that are very
similar to just clustering by year.
Investment growth (demeaned)
−.006 −.004 −.002 0 .002 .004
Fiscal Shock
17Table 2: The Effect of US fiscal shocks on investment and the current account
(1) (2) (3) (4)
CA CA weight INV INV weight
Fiscal Shock -1.630** -0.581* 1.250* 0.930
(0.486) (0.279) (0.594) (0.548)
Constant 0.010** 0.199*
(0.002) (0.084)
Observations 3002 2994 2588 2558
R-squared 0.003 0.001 0.129 0.058
** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1
Investment regressions include a set of country dummies.
Standard errors clustered by year.
rent account is accomplished by a change in investment or savings abroad. Thus,
we might expect a coefficient of roughly the same size (but opposite sign) for investment
(since CA = S - I ) if there is no savings response but a smaller response
if savings moves.
Columns (3) and (4) of table 2 suggest that the current account shocks are
absorbed through changes to investment, not savings. The investment response is
always close to the absolute value of the current account response. A US fiscal
shock of one percent of non-US world GDP is accompanied by roughly the same
size increase in investment abroad. As with the current account regressions, the
coefficient for the unweighted regression is larger than the weighted regression, but
the gap is not substantial.
A slightly different way to look at the same question is directly through the
current account. Table 3 shows the result of using the exogenous fiscal shock as an
instrument for shocks to the current account. In columns (1) and (2) the change in
the current account as a percentage of own country GDP is regressed against the
changes in the US current account divided by GDP in the rest of the world. The US
current account change is instrumented with the exogenous fiscal shock. In columns
(3) and (4) the change in investment at the country year level is regressed against
the change in the current account at the country year level with the current account
change instrumented using the US fiscal shock.
Table 3 is similar to Table 2 with the coefficients rescaled to more closely match
the accounting identities. Since the sum of the world’s current account must be zero,
we expect the coefficient on the weighted regression in column (2) to be negative one.
18Table 3: The Effect of Current Account Shocks - IV
(1) (2) (3) (4)
CA CA weight INV INV weight
US CA Change / World GDP -3.063** -1.137**
(1.067) (0.372)
CA change / GDP -0.579** -1.048
(0.202) (0.696)
Constant 0.001 -0.039
(0.010) (0.040)
Observations 3002 2994 2268 2266
R-squared 0.013
** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1
Investment regressions include a set of country dummies.
Standard errors clustered by year.
For investment, a coefficient of negative one in the weighted regressions indicates
that the current account shock is completely absorbed by investment with no change
in savings.14 These are roughly the values that we observe. For the average country
we see highly statistically significant responses in the current account when US fiscal
shocks are used to instrument US current account movements. For the average
country we see statistically significant responses in investment to domestic current
account movements that are caused by US fiscal shocks.
Exogenous fiscal shocks in the US appear to cause movements in the US current
account which cause changes to investment in the rest of the world. In the
next section we move to smaller samples of the data to examine whether there is
heterogeneity in how countries are affected by the shock. In particular we will examine
whether levels of development, currency regimes, or levels of financial openness
affect the size of the response to US fiscal shocks.
3.3 Does the Shock Affect Countries Symmetrically?
Table 4 shows the results broken up by level of development where the advanced
countries are the original OECD countries, the emerging countries are the countries
14Note that the sign of the investment coefficients is flipped compared to the reduced form table
(2) because the right hand side variable is now the domestic current account. In table 2 the
coefficients are the response of investment to a world savings shock. In table 3 the coefficients
represent the response of investment to a domestic current account shock. These will run in
opposite directions.
19Table 4: Responses by Level of Development
Current Account
All Advanced Emerging Developing
Fiscal Shock -1.630** -0.775+ -1.471 -1.992**
(0.486) (0.448) (0.996) (0.582)
Observations 3002 651 600 1751
R-squared 0.003 0.006 0.002 0.003
Investment
All Advanced Emerging Developing
Fiscal Shock 1.250* 0.562 1.841* 1.329
(0.594) (0.530) (0.688) (0.853)
Observations 2588 634 534 1420
R-squared 0.129 0.024 0.049 0.148
** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1
Investment regressions include a set of country dummies.
Standard errors clustered by year.
in the EMBI index along with much of Eastern Europe, and the developing counties
are all other countries.15 For the current account, the response to US fiscal shocks
appear to be decreasing in levels of development, though one cannot reject that
all three groups have identical coefficients. For investment, the emerging group
appears to have the largest response, but again one cannot reject that all three
groups are identical. Perhaps more interesting than the pattern of results is the fact
that countries at all three levels of development have a significant response to the
US shocks to world savings (significant for the Advanced and Developing samples
for the current account and for the Emerging sample in investment) and that the
magnitudes of these results are very similar across levels of development. Initially,
one might think that large advanced nations have such deep capital markets that
outside fiscal shocks would be moot, but one must consider the global savings glut
argument that an increase in savings abroad affects a country even as large and
financially deep as the US. In that context, it may not be surprising that US shocks
spill across all types of nations.
Table 5 shows the results broken down by currency regime. The currency regime
is categorized across two dimensions. First, are countries dollar based or non-dollar
based and second, are they pegged or are they nonpegged. We use the coding
from Shambaugh (2004) for both measures. The base country is the country to
15See table 7 in the appendix for a full list of countries in each category.
20which a nation pegs or if it is not pegged in a given year, the country to which it
pegs when it does peg. Given that nearly every country pegs at some point in the
sample, the base country is directly revealed. In questionable cases, the history of
the currency and behavior of nearby countries can be used as a guide. Countries are
considered pegged if they stay within 2 percent bands against their base currency
throughout the year or if they have a perfectly flat exchange rate except for a one
time devaluation.16
The results suggest that dollar based economies have a larger response to both
the current account and investment compared to non dollar based economies. Pegs
have a somewhat larger response than floats. Dollar based pegs have the largest
response for both variables and it is only for the dollar based countries that we can
reject no effect. While this variation seems reasonable, none of these differences is
significant. It may be that dollar based and dollar pegged countries are more tied
to the US capital market and hence feel the impact of US tax shocks more directly,
but in general, the coefficients are within range of one another, so no definitive
statements can be made. The only significantly different coefficient is that nondollar
nonpegs show effectively zero response in investment, but that coefficient is
imprecisely estimated and we cannot reject zero or one or negative one for that
matter.
Table 6 shows the variation in responses across financially open and closed
economies. In this table, we use the binary measure of the IMF’s annual yearbook
to classify countries (aggregating the disaggregated measures into a binary
classification after 1995 for continuity). Closed economies appear to have a larger
response in the current account but a smaller response to investment. The standard
errors are fairly high across groups leaving the differences insignificant. The results,
though, do not change substantially if one uses continuous measures developed by
Edwards or Chinn and Ito (2006)17 to divide countries into groups. It seems odd
that even countries that nominally have capital controls are affected by changes in
US tax policy, but few countries with capital controls truly shut off access to capital
markets. Instead, they tend to temper price signals or simply slow capital flows. In
fact, a number of studies suggest that capital controls do not substantially alter the
16See Klein and Shambaugh (2009) for an extensive discussion of the different ways to code a
country’s exchange rate regime.
17Also see Chinn and Ito (2008).
21Table 5: Responses by Currency Regime
(1) (2) (3)
All Dollar non Dollar
Based Based
Current Account
All
Fiscal Shock -1.630** -1.844** -1.283*
(0.486) (0.639) (0.622)
Observations 3002 1851 1151
R-squared 0.003 0.004 0.002
Pegs
Fiscal Shock -1.837* -2.032+ -1.614
(0.728) (1.172) (0.968)
Observations 1298 658 640
R-squared 0.002 0.003 0.002
Non Pegs
Fiscal Shock -1.436* -1.727* -0.788
(0.670) (0.786) (0.535)
Observations 1701 1193 508
R-squared 0.004 0.005 0.003
Investment
All
Fiscal Shock 1.250* 1.735* 0.535
(0.594) (0.733) (0.803)
Observations 2588 1564 1024
R-squared 0.129 0.051 0.199
Pegs
Fiscal Shock 1.419+ 1.848* 1.043
(0.745) (0.808) (1.211)
Observations 1046 513 533
R-squared 0.206 0.137 0.232
Non Pegs
Fiscal Shock 1.066 1.587+ 0.046
(0.630) (0.812) (0.717)
Observations 1542 1051 491
R-squared 0.074 0.079 0.066
** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1
Investment regressions include country dummies.
Standard errors clustered by year.
22Table 6: Responses by Financial Openness
Current Account
All Open Closed
Fiscal Shock -1.630** -0.726 -2.048**
(0.486) (0.995) (0.568)
Observations 3002 749 2068
R-squared 0.003 0.001 0.005
Investment
All Open Closed
Fiscal Shock 1.250* 1.564* 1.019+
(0.594) (0.706) (0.598)
Observations 2588 729 1859
R-squared 0.129 0.091 0.153
** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.1
Investment regressions include country dummies.
Standard errors clustered by year.
volume of capital flows for a country (though they may alter the composition).18 In
that context, we may not be surprised to see similar responses across different types
of financial openness measures.
In fact, all that is needed to have symmetric responses across different country
types is marginal lending from world markets and similar elasticities of investment
with regards to world interest rates across countries. This is consistent with the
conclusion of Caselli and Feyrer (2007) which shows that financial returns to capital
are roughly equalized across countries. If returns are equalized at the margin, this
suggests that shocks should transmit across all countries in a similar fashion. This
is largely what we observe.
4 Conclusion
This paper takes a straightforward approach to examining the transmission of fiscal
shocks across borders using accounting identities. We view changes in tax policy as
a change in government savings. Assuming that change in savings is not entirely
offset by either private savings or investment, the current account should respond
18See for example, a number of papers in the book Edwards (2007). In particular, the chapters
by Magud and Reinhart (2007) makes the point directly, but other country studies suggest the
same result.
23to such a shock. If the home current account changes, the foreign must as well.
A tax shock in one country should therefore lead to changes in either savings or
investment (or both) in other countries.
Using exogenous tax policy shocks in the US developed by Romer and Romer
(2009b), we find that when US taxes increase, a substantial (roughly half) portion of
that increase in savings is transmitted to the current account. That increase in the
US current account is mirrored in a current account deficit abroad. There appears
to be little change in foreign savings. Instead, investment abroad moves nearly one
for one with the current account. Thus, fiscal contraction through tax increases may
lead to increased investment abroad. The result is novel both in itself and due to
the approach through which it is reached. Due to the intertwined nature of savings
and investment around the globe, previous work studying the change in savings in
one country has not been able to identify the impact on other countries’ investment.
One might expect that if a large country increased taxes, that fiscal contraction
may act as a drag on the world economy. But, if that increase in savings also
increases investment in other countries, such an effect may be mitigated. In a
domestic context, we tend to think one reason a tax cut does not purely crowd out
investment is the ability to borrow from abroad. In the global context, though, the
world economy is closed, so a change in taxes has a substantial impact on investment.
Along the way to this important result, the paper has implications for a number
of important theories. The fact that a tax policy change affects the US current
account suggests that neither Ricardian equivalence nor the Feldstein Horioka result
hold completely. Our results also suggest that the notion of twin deficits appears
sensible despite some recent econometric evidence to the contrary. Most of all,
though, our results suggest that savings shocks in one country affect investment
around the globe.
The implications for today’s world are important. According to these results,
tax cuts in one country will lower the pool of savings available for investment around
the globe. We caution that our identification is from tax changes that are exogenous
with respect to current economic conditions under the assumption of output at the
natural rate. This is clearly not the case with fiscal policy in the first half of 2009.
It may be that the short run response to changes in fiscal policy is very different
in periods of slack aggregate demand compared to an economy operating at the
natural rate of output. Ultimately, however, the economy will be operating at or
24near the natural rate and the accounting identities continue to hold.
25Table 7: List of Countries by Level of Development
Advanced Emerging Developing
Australia Argentina Afghanistan Gambia, The Neth. Antilles
Austria Brazil Algeria Ghana Nicaragua
Belgium Chile Angola Guatemala Niger
Canada Colombia Bahamas, The Guinea Nigeria
Denmark Egypt Bahrain Guyana Oman
Finland Hong Kong Bangladesh Haiti Panama
France India Barbados Honduras Paraguay
Germany Indonesia Benin Iran Qatar
Greece Israel Bolivia Jamaica Romania
Iceland Korea, Rep. Burkina Faso Jordan Rwanda
Ireland Malaysia Burundi Kenya Senegal
Italy Mexico Cameroon Lao PDR Sierra Leone
Japan Pakistan Central Afr Rep. Lebanon Sri Lanka
Luxembourg Peru Chad Lesotho Sudan
Netherlands Philippines Congo, Dem. Rep. Liberia Swaziland
New Zealand Saudi Arabia Costa Rica Libya Syrian Arab Rep
Norway Singapore Cote d’Ivoire Madagascar Tanzania
Portugal South Africa Cyprus Malawi Togo
Spain Thailand Dominican Rep. Mali Trinidad & Tobago
Sweden Turkey Ecuador Malta Tunisia
Switzerland Venezuela El Salvador Mauritania Uganda
United Kingdom Equatorial Guinea Mauritius United Arab Emir.
Ethiopia Morocco Uruguay
Fiji Myanmar Zambia
Gabon Nepal