Russell_muirhead
Government
The_Ethics_of_Exit:
Over the past decade, just war theory has been extended to include a new category:
postwar justice, or jus post bellum. In its most ambitious formulations, jus post
bellum requires victorious nations to meet demanding and expensive duties before
they can ethically disengage from a postwar situation. This would highly constrain
NATO, for example, as it winds down the occupation force in Afghanistan. Against
this view, what follows will argue that postwar justice does not require NATO or
the United States to remain in Afghanistan until it successfully establishes a stable
democratic state that enforces individual rights, nor does it require that the United
States fully develop the Afghan economy. The demands of postwar justice are
lesser: It may be enough if the Afghan state that emerges from this war is legitimate
rather than democratic, and relatively secure, even in the absence of full prosperity.
What postwar justice does require, I will argue, is meeting the specific responsibilities
to particular groups and individuals that have been accrued over more than a
decade of fighting.
According to the tradition of just war theory, wars are judged twice: once with
respect to the cause, and again with respect to how they are fought.1
 Over the past
decade, a number of observers have focused on the possibility that wars ought to be
judged a third time as well. On this view, we should judge the way wars are settled
or ended on terms that do not entirely derive from whether the cause was just or
whether the war was justly fought. This third category, jus post bellum, now vies for
inclusion among the ancient categories of jus ad bellum and jus in bello. Although
the claims jus post bellum are more familiar than the novelty of the category might
suggest, it is not easy to get clarity on the demands (and, just as importantly, the
requests) it makes. Various advocates of the concept have specified it quite differently,
although it is possible to group advocates of jus post bellum into two rough
rot19089_ch09.indd 153 ot19089_ch09.indd 153 10/7/11 2:32 PM 0/7/11 2:32 PM154 Russell Muirhead
groups (maximalists, who argue that postwar justice requires a great deal, and
minimalists, who argue that it only makes more basic demands).
In a perfect world, we might hope that moral reasons would trump all other
sources of motivation: In the ideal world, morality always comes first. But in the
familiar world peopled by the “crooked timber” of humanity, prudent action depends
on entertaining considerations beyond moral ones. The rule of morality,
where moral reasons overwhelm every other kind of reason, is not likely to lead
to humane conditions. Maximal understandings of postwar justice subtly invite us
to imagine that morality might dictate, rather than constrain. Among other things,
this will make morality less forceful by making it less worldly. Even more important,
moral reasons are often not singular—morality involves many reasons which
conflict. These conflicts are especially evident in the scenarios that arise in postwar
situations. To suppose that morality might, even in the ideal and unworldly case,
dictate action is to privilege one narrow kind of moral idea—obligation—over all
other moral reasons.
Thus the maximal image of postwar justice should be resisted, and postwar
justice should instead focus on more minimal yet urgent considerations, such as
peace, stability, legitimacy, and the responsibilities to protect specific groups and
persons within the defeated or host nation who contributed to and who shared the
(just) goals of the victors, even and especially when those goals proved too costly
to fully realize. To abandon one’s friends is reprehensible, even when protecting
one’s friends is very expensive. Protecting those who have worked and risked all to
create institutions and practices that reflect our greatest ideals should be the focus
of postwar settlement. This is of urgent relevance in the endgame that the United
States considers as it prepares to exit Afghanistan.
Is just post bellum Something New?
Jus Post Bellum is not one of the classic categories of just war theory: Michael
Walzer’s classic Just and Unjust Wars, for instance, does not contain an explicit
account of the matter.2
 Some people point to a 1994 proposal by Michael Schuck
as the starting point for an explicit category of jus ad bellum.
3
 Kosovo, Bosnia, and
the problem of peacekeeping raised the specter of extended occupations in the name
of justice, but it was the invasion of Iraq in 2003 that brought scholars (but not only
scholars) to concentrate their concern on the justice of what happens after combat
operations come to a close.4
 Combat operations were a small part of the story
in Iraq; in Afghanistan, the moment that demarcated combat and post-combat has
never been clear. Although traditional just war theory seems mostly concerned with
the causes of war and the manner of fighting war—in short, with combat. Considerations
about justice do not come to a stop once combat operations stop.
If it is a new category, from a deeper perspective, jus post bellum reflects a familiar
kind of evaluation. Not entirely novel, its essentials follow from the more familiar
categories of jus in bello and jus ad bellum. If war is only justified as a last resort of
self-defense, and if it must be fought in a manner that respects the distinction between
rot19089_ch09.indd 154 ot19089_ch09.indd 154 10/7/11 2:32 PM 0/7/11 2:32 PMThe Ethics of Exit: Moral Obligation in the Afghan Endgame 155
combatants and noncombatants, then it only makes sense that the kind of peace we
most approve of would be constrained by the very moral considerations that inform
what counts as a just cause of war and a just manner of fighting it. As many advocates
of jus post bellum note, the basic idea that the justice of war depends in part
on the kind of peace it produces goes back to Aristotle.
What happens after combat operations have ended profoundly influences our
evaluation of the war itself. The ancient practice of victor’s justice—according
to which, after Rome sacked Carthage, all the men were killed and the women
and children sold into slavery—has no hold on our intuitions. More recently, the
way we commonly evaluate the world wars of the twentieth century is instructive.
World War II is sometimes called a “good war” and the word “good,” in contrast
to “victorious” or “effective,” is instructive. If indeed it was a good war, it was
good in that our cause seems to have been good, and the cause of our enemies, evil.
But in addition, it was a ‘good’ war because its settlement laid the foundation for
a peaceful society of states in which individual rights could be secured and nations
could prosper. Other wars have brought victory, from a military or political point
of view, such as the 1991 Gulf War. But the First Gulf War will not go down as
a good war because its settlement was both morally ambiguous (leaving in place
the enemy dictator) and unstable. World War I is perhaps the most familiar case
of a war that gave way to an unstable peace, in no small measure because its victors
imposed punitive terms on the defeated. The unstable peace of the 1920s and
1930s, and the cataclysmic war that followed, vitiate the sacrifice of World War I,
and amplifies its senseless quality.
We engaged in the analysis of jus post bellum before the category became current.
Just as inevitably as we will judge the cause of war or the manner in which
it is fought, so we will also judge the kind of settlement that represents the end of
war. To be sure, the category of jus post bellum brings more urgent attention to
the moral importance of the way wars are ended—an attention that in any case is
highlighted by the kinds of conflicts that certain countries, like the United States,
find themselves in at the moment. If it is a new category for arranging our moral
understanding, it is not new in its substance. It is already present in our arguments,
evaluations, and judgments.
What Does Postwar Justice Entail?
To say that postwar justice is already present in our arguments and evaluations does
not mean that we agree about what it means. On the contrary, there is much disagreement
about what postwar justice entails. The recent literature, for instance, reveals a
broad difference between what Alex Bellamy calls “minimalist” and “maximalist”
conceptions of jus post bellum.
5
 The restricted conception of jus post bellum focuses,
in brief, on refraining from violating basic rights and quickly exiting so as to allow
the subject nation to carry on with its political life: There is a presumption, as Gary
Bass argues, “that victorious states should seek to limit their occupation of conquered
countries to the shortest time possible.”6
 The focus on respecting elemental rights
rot19089_ch09.indd 155 ot19089_ch09.indd 155 10/7/11 2:32 PM 0/7/11 2:32 PM156 Russell Muirhead
 insists that even once fighters stop fighting, they continue to follow the laws of war
and the moral principles that invest even those on the “wrong” side (or merely
the “losing” side) with rights. In the minimalist understanding of jus post bellum, the
responsibilities that follow combat emanate from the logic of just war theory. The
main moral imperatives of minimalist jus post bellum are negative: Do not harm innocents,
respect the sovereignty of the defeated nation, and lay a foundation for a
durable peace. This is the jus post bellum that we know before we name it, since
it is implicit in ordinary judgments and evaluations. This understanding of jus post
bellum does not necessarily present a severe constraint on the ethics of exit—on
the contrary, the ethical thing is to exit, and allow the defeated people to resume
its sovereignty.
Maximalist conceptions, by contrast, encompass the more ambitious agendas
of political reconstruction, social and civic rehabilitation, and economic rebuilding.
They ask not merely that victors obey the laws of war even in peace; they envision
prosecuting those guilty of war crimes (and the violation of rights that made war
necessary in the first place) in war crimes tribunals. In this view, victors have a
responsibility to reconstruct the political order on a basis that puts the positive
enforcement of rights on a secure foundation; ideally, victors would also rebuild
civil society and reconstruct the peacetime economy.
Maximalist understandings of jus post bellum grow out of the very same
 concerns that give rise to minimalist understandings. The central goal of minimalist
jus post bellum—exiting so as to allow the polity to carry on their collective
political life (in a manner that does not threaten others)—is born of respect for the
rights of nations to rule themselves. But the right of self-determination derives from
individual rights: The rights of political communities or states “derive ultimately
from the rights of individuals.”7
 Taking individual rights seriously, however, makes
stopping at a minimal understanding of jus post bellum unstable; if defending rights
is what justifies going to war and if observing rights is what defines fighting a war
justly, then it is a short step to saying that postwar justice is essentially about securing
individual rights for both winners and losers. This is precisely what maximal
understandings of jus post bellum assert. As one account of jus post bellum summarizes
this understanding, “A just peace is one that vindicates the human rights of all
parties to the conflict.”8
 The contemporary confidence in the universality of basic
human rights reflects a post-Kantian morality, where the imperatives of morality
are categorical. Indeed, some jus post bellum advocates look explicitly to Kant for
both grounding and inspiration. In Brian Orend’s view, for example, Kant was the
first to offer a sustained understanding of postwar justice. In his reading, “Kant
 favored widespread internal regime change in the direction of human rights realization.”
The goal of post-war justice is to establish a “minimally just” or “legitimate”
society, which he defines as one that seeks recognition of its legitimacy in the
 international community, subscribes to rules of international justice and citizenship,
and satisfies the “human rights of its individual members (to security, subsistence,
liberty, equality, and recognition)” (Orend 2007, 578). “Vindicating rights,”
Orend says, “not vindictive revenge, is the order of the day.”9
 Maximalist jus post
bellum makes a policy of regime change morally respectable (if not also morally
rot19089_ch09.indd 156 ot19089_ch09.indd 156 10/7/11 2:32 PM 0/7/11 2:32 PMThe Ethics of Exit: Moral Obligation in the Afghan Endgame 157
obligatory). What counts as a “minimally just polity” reflects universal standards
of justice: A minimally just society, as Orend says, is “in every individual’s self
interest,” and “respects everyone’s potential for autonomy and self-direction,” and
“thus has universal appeal.”10 It is not much of an exaggeration to say that in this
view, the basic principles that define the minimal threshold for a just polity represent
the “end of history,” understood as the most justifiable goal of human action
that all human beings will come to grasp over time.11
The force of maximalist conceptions of jus post bellum is seen most clearly
not in wars of self-defense (it is odd for successful self-defense to generate a duty
to sponsor the aggressor’s political, social, and economic reconstruction), but in
humanitarian interventions. For instance, Orend argues that regime change is a
justified cause for war if the regime in question has so woefully violated the rights
of its own citizens that it cannot be seen as a “minimally just regime,” and if the
interveners undertake the process of building at least a minimally just regime in its
place.12 This process will necessarily engage the forces fighting for regime change
deeply into the affairs of the host society. The process should include, for instance,
purging the old regime and prosecuting its criminals, demilitarizing the society,
providing security for the whole society, constructing a rights-respecting constitution,
nourishing civil society, and rebuilding the economy.13
In this view, the kinds of duties that arise depend on the nature of the regime one
is fighting. Bass, for instance, argues powerfully for a hybrid understanding of jus
post bellum, where the default position advocates a limited occupation of defeated
regimes, but requires something more ambitious in cases of “extreme” genocidal
states. “Genocidal states,” Bass argues, “fall into a special category.”14 In Bass’s
view, we not only have a duty to intervene to protect innocents against the atrocities
committed by extreme genocidal regimes, but we also possess a corresponding duty
to assist the sovereign people in their effort to reconstruct a decent sovereign state.
And the longer onlookers wait to intervene against genocidal regimes, “the greater
the obligation to a reconstruction program that aids the victims.”15
For Walzer too, wars of humanitarian intervention motivate new and more
 ambitious moral duties. “Imagine a humanitarian intervention that ends with the
massacres stopped and the murderous regime overthrown; but the country is devastated,
the economy in ruins, the people hungry and afraid,” he asks. “The forces
that intervened did well, but they are not finished.” We acquire new responsibilities,
Walzer argues, in the course of a successful humanitarian intervention. It may
not seem fair that in the course of doing one good thing (at great sacrifice) one acquires
new responsibilities to do more good things (at more cost). But that, Walzer
insists, is what fighting justly requires. We simply would not praise a humanitarian
intervention that left its beneficiaries in poverty and anarchy as successful or good.
Walzer is not certain of exactly what duties arise in humanitarian interventions—to
know that, we would need a more fully developed theory of “justice-in-endings . . .
that engages the actual experience of humanitarian (and other) interventions.” But
such a theory, when worked out, should, Walzer says, detail what the responsibilities
of intervening forces “will be if they win.” Ideally, he says, an international
agency “could stipulate and enforce these responsibilities.”16
rot19089_ch09.indd 157 ot19089_ch09.indd 157 10/7/11 2:32 PM 0/7/11 2:32 PM158 Russell Muirhead
Orend too would ideally like to invest the maximal jus post bellum responsibilities
in international law, enforced by international authorities. “There should be another
Geneva Convention,” he says, “this one focusing exclusively on jus post bellum—that
is, on what the winners of war may and may not do to countries and regimes they have
defeated.”17 Ideally, there would be “firm and objective guidelines against which to
measure achievements and to create timelines for both progress and eventual withdrawal.”18
Orend says that “There needs, in short, to be an ethical ‘exit strategy’ from
war, and it deserves at least as much thought and effort as the purely military exit
strategy so much on the minds of policy planners and commanding officers.”19 With
respect to Afghanistan, Walzer, too, holds that “we have incurred obligations from
fighting for eight years in someone else’s country.” Walzer notes that those who say
“‘This is a mess, and we should simply get out’” are uttering a view that, given the concrete
responsibilities and commitments we have undertaken, is “simply immoral.”20
The Ethics of Exit in Afghanistan
How the ethics of exit bear on the Afghan endgame depend on whether minimalist
or maximalist criteria apply to the war in Afghanistan. If we apply the minimal
understandings of jus post bellum, then the central goals are to get out quickly after
the threat is neutralized and restore sovereignty to Afghanistan. In the maximal
view—akin to what Orend or Walzer would recommend—the United States would
fail in its obligations if it were to exit Afghanistan before a stable, responsive,
rights-respecting, accountable government; a vital civil society; and a promising
economy are in place.
The difference between minimal and maximal understandings bears directly on
whether it is right to differentiate between the Taliban and al-Qaeda (and identify
the latter as more of a threat to American national security than the former). Some
suggest that a speedier path to stability requires tolerating some Taliban presence,
or at least a willingness to negotiate with representatives from the Taliban.21 In this
view, it is in the interest of the United States to hammer out an informal accommodation
with the Taliban that permits NATO and the United States to exit without
inviting civil war—so long as there is assurance that the Taliban would not again
tolerate al-Qaeda in Afghanistan. Protecting Afghans from Taliban rule is a lesser
priority, in this view. In the minimalist version of postwar justice, such a strategic
accommodation might even be required, especially if it allowed the United States
to exit Afghanistan and return full sovereignty to the Afghan state.
But on the maximal understanding of jus post bellum, this kind of exit would be
immoral. A theocratic regime by definition violates individuals’ right to conscience;
furthermore, a regime severely restricts women’s civil, political, and economic rights,
multiplies the injustice. What Orend calls a “minimally just political” requires political
equality, freedom of religion, and equal opportunity, all of which Taliban rule in
one way or another would likely violate. The same would likely hold if the United
States exited with a regime like Karzai’s in power: Again, a corrupt central government
that, though less repressive than the Taliban, devolves power to patriarchal
rot19089_ch09.indd 158 ot19089_ch09.indd 158 10/7/11 2:32 PM 0/7/11 2:32 PMThe Ethics of Exit: Moral Obligation in the Afghan Endgame 159
tribes at the periphery also falls short of the equality, liberty, and recognition that
Orend’s minimally just state demands. Perhaps any regime that devolved extensive
powers to traditional tribal authorities would fail to satisfy a minimal version of Western
understandings of individual rights and political justice.
This points to the central difference between minimal and maximal understandings
of postwar justice: Where minimal understandings place a premium on exiting
quickly and restoring the autonomous political life of the defeated nation, maximal
understandings endorse long-term occupations, which are necessary to restructuring
the political culture. For instance, establishing a regime in Afghanistan with the
enforcement powers to uphold individual rights would require building a central
government with the capacity to regulate social practices throughout the country.
It would require a central government that could enforce women’s rights to equal
education and career choice. The only acceptable solution, in this view, would be a
centralized democratic government with enough immunity from local power structures
to rewrite local practices (this would fall in the extreme upper-right quadrant
of the spectrum that Rothstein and Arquilla detail in Chapter 1, Figure 1.1).
 Creating a stable state of this sort, capable of resisting local opposition and recasting
traditional modes of legitimacy, would likely require an occupation lasting for
decades and costing many billions.
Although advocates of the maximal view do not advocate that occupying powers
sponsor and guide a social revolution from above, the logic of the argument
points in this direction. In the maximal conception of jus post bellum, morality is
not merely a constraint on strategic action, as it is in traditional just war theory. It
is rather a guide that displaces strategy; ultimately, it replaces political judgment.
Morality—not a prudential assessment of what is necessary for peace—dictates the
goals of war, and morality sets the terms for what kind of war settlement is acceptable.
Morality dictates that the old regime be purged, that the society be demilitarized,
that the victors supply police security, that a “rights-respecting constitution
which features checks and balances” be established, that the economy be rebuilt,
that the educational system be revamped and “new values” be inculcated.22 All
things considered, any of these goals might in fact prove desirable in Afghanistan,
Iraq, or elsewhere. Or perhaps they might not: Sometimes tolerating the old regime
rather than purging it conduces to postwar stability; sometimes allowing significant
segments of society to retain their militias and arms is more prudent than demilitarizing
(such as with the Kurds); sometimes a single constitution fails to produce
a governing majority (Iraq in 2010); sometimes it is more respectful to let people
design their own educational institutions according to values they actually believe
in. What policy best conduces to peace cannot be decided by consulting a list of
human rights or universal moral principles.
When morality takes priority over political judgment and military strategy, the
tyranny of morality displaces all other modes of reasoning. This in turn endangers
the ultimate goal of morality: a decent society. The minimal understanding of jus
post bellum, grounded in the traditional understanding of just war theory, aims to
allow a defeated people to get on with their collective life—to make and to remake
their own society and their own politics, consistent with respecting the rights of
rot19089_ch09.indd 159 ot19089_ch09.indd 159 10/7/11 2:32 PM 0/7/11 2:32 PM160 Russell Muirhead
other peoples. This is why its focus is on observing the negative duties that protect
those who do not present a direct threat to one’s life, forging a workable and durable
peace, and then getting out. In the new maximalist, however, jus post bellum,
grounded in a utopian image of the end of history, morality rules.
In theory, the rule of morality should be agreeable. That is, people should
 embrace it—after all, it is, in theory, “in every individual’s self-interest” and “thus
has universal appeal.”23 But what if, by chance, everyone does not agree to the imposition
of a minimally just state? As a matter of fact, everyone will not agree to
the principles that define a minimally just polity as Orend describes them (at least
not everyone in Iraq and Afghanistan). Should dissenters be coerced, or forced to
accept what (we say) is in their interest? How can we be so certain that it is in their
interest, if they say it is not?
The answer to this question points to a distinctive feature of the neo-Kantian
morality that supports maximal conceptions of postwar justice. What gives moral
principles their force, in this view, is not that people in fact accept them, but that
they are justifiable in principle. Some philosophers will supply an argument that
shows how their conclusions are rationally justifiable; but many forgo this trouble,
and more or less assert the justificatory force of what they propound. There is, of
course, a danger here: To believe that our basic principles of political morality are
rationally justifiable means it does not really matter whether people actually agree
to the principles. Because the principles are justifiable, people should agree. When
we stop noticing whether people agree because we assume they would agree if they
were exercising their faculties of moral reasoning correctly, morality threatens to
become tyrannical.
The tyranny of morality is dangerous not only to defeated peoples in postwar
occupations. It is also a threat to the democratic life of the victor’s domestic politics.
What, for instance, is the right course of action if jus post bellum morality dictates
that we reconstruct a defeated people’s politics and rebuild their economy and at
the same time, the citizenry of the victorious country does not support the expenditures
required to pursue these goals? For some, this is an easy question—akin to
whether a government should enforce equal citizenship on a population that contains
many, (even a majority of) racists. In this case, the moral principle of equality
should trump public opinion. That morality rarely has such power does not disturb
the principled view that it should. Mere public opinion, in this view, has no moral
standing. The same is true of maximalist jus post bellum: Ideally, a victorious country
will fulfill its moral duties irrespective of public opinion at home. “Weakness of
will” might explain a failure to do your duty—but it does not justify such a failure.24
This is why the advocates of maximal jus post bellum are not satisfied with resting
responsibility for postwar duties on the shoulders of victorious parties in war.
The “real-world realization of morality through law” requires a “ratified legal document,”
enforceable through international agencies.25 The rule of morality requires,
in short, a moral ruler. One might shudder to imagine what kind of enforcement
powers international bodies must possess in order to compel victorious parties to
carry out extremely expensive and long-term economic, political, and military aid
programs against the wishes of their own populations. Even if such a power were
rot19089_ch09.indd 160 ot19089_ch09.indd 160 10/7/11 2:32 PM 0/7/11 2:32 PMThe Ethics of Exit: Moral Obligation in the Afghan Endgame 161
possible, it is hard to imagine how it could be desirable, for there is no such thing
as an impartial moral ruler. Every worldly power will have its own worldly interests,
and will be supported by its own coalition of worldly powers. To imagine that
such a power would act well when it is not accountable to the peoples it affects (the
victorious peoples and defeated peoples) is to be utopian in the worst way. Nothing
human is pure—not even international institutions.
At stake here is a deeper philosophic question: whether there are, in theory,
standards of political morality that can be applied across borders and cultures. Even
if one believes that there are very general universal principles of justice and morality,
it is a further question whether our moral yardsticks are so finely calibrated that
we can confidently describe a regime-type that is “minimally just” for all peoples
of the world. In the West, we express our basic principles of political morality in
the language of rights, and this language has enough currency to supply the basic
vocabulary of the UN’s universal declaration of rights. But we should not be fooled
by universal declarations into thinking that rights are easily made universally acceptable.
In the Western nations, where such rights are taken as foundational, their
exact specification and application is always disputed. Perhaps underlying these
disputes is a baseline of agreement, perhaps not. We do not usually need to plumb
the philosophic depths of our disputes because concrete and urgent matters make
pragmatic accommodations possible in the absence of complete philosophic agreement.
The fact that our own principles of justice are the subject of intense disputation
should give us pause in supposing that we can construct a regime-type that
reflects a universal substratum of “minimal justice.”
This “pause” is what informs the minimalist understanding of jus post bellum,
which counsels that victors should do as little damage as possible and equip the
defeated people to get on with their national life in a manner that does not threaten
their neighbors or the international world. The idea is not that there are no universal
principles of morality or justice. Perhaps there are, and perhaps we know what they
are. Rather, we should not be overly confident that we can know exactly how they
should be specified, adapted to local circumstances, and approximated in enduring
institutional arrangements. This is why minimalist jus post bellum puts a priority on
national self-determination over imposing even a “minimally just regime.” Every
just regime is, in practice, only minimally just. It is up to the defeated peoples in the
wake of a just war to work out their own version of a minimally just polity.
The Special Case of Genocidal Regimes
Some views of jus post bellum are a hybrid where minimal postwar justice applies
in most cases, while maximal postwar justice requirements apply in a few special
cases—namely, in cases of genocidal regimes. For instance, Gary Bass aims to
 preserve the humanity of the minimal understanding (the goal of which is essentially
to equip the defeated people to take responsibility for their own national life)
while carving out an exception for maximal understandings that only applies in
“extreme” cases of intervening to overturn genocidal powers.26 Bass is aware of the
rot19089_ch09.indd 161 ot19089_ch09.indd 161 10/7/11 2:32 PM 0/7/11 2:32 PM162 Russell Muirhead
disincentive that such weighty duties present, and is reluctant to “add to the burden”
that already dissuades states from engaging in humanitarian interventions. Still, he
says, “if a state has satisfied the demands of jus ad bellum and jus in bello in its war
against a state committing a genocide, but did not reconstruct the genocidal country
afterward, then a strong case can be made that the justice of the overall effort would
be compromised.”27 In addition, failure to reconstruct the genocidal country would
raise suspicions that the intervening country was only acting out of a sense of its
strategic interests, perhaps compromising the justice of the cause of war.
From this perspective, the critical question for the United States and NATO
 exiting Afghanistan concerns whether the Taliban ought to be regarded as posing an
“extreme” genocide risk, thus justifying further intervention as needed. Abhorrent
as Taliban rule was and would likely be if the Taliban were to come to power
again, their record reflects that they did not engage in one-sided mass murder
with the intention of annihilating a tribal, ethnic, national, or religious group. In
short, the Taliban regime violated basic human rights and liberties, but was not a
genocidal power.28 Thus, on the “Bass standard,” the war in Afghanistan cannot
be understood as the kind of emergency humanitarian intervention that warrants
applying the most extensive jus post bellum responsibilities. Rather, the Afghan
War is better understood as a self-defensive conflict where the United States had
reason to remove the threat and ensure that the conditions nourishing the threat in
the first place are ameliorated, all while following the laws of war and causing as
little destruction as possible—and then, to get out.29
The difficulty with this combination (that applies minimalist understandings of
postwar justice in most cases, and maximalist understandings in the case of genocidal
regimes) is that the category of “genocidal regime” is a very low standard.
Rulers can steal from their people, oppress large segments of the population, and
impoverish their people without being genocidal. So it is tempting to argue that if
there is a strong reason to reconstruct polities in genocidal regimes, there must be
some reason (perhaps less urgent) to reconstruct very bad and unjust regimes that
stop their crimes short of genocide. This is sensible, as far as it goes. Going further
requires entertaining the notion that not all moral reasons generate obligations.
It may not always be wrong to undertake more than minimal postwar justice
asks—but it also may not be required. Postwar justice needs to make sense of the
idea that there is some kind of moral reason to intervene in and contribute to the reconstruction
of unjust regimes, without resorting to a brittle requirement to intervene,
occupy, and reconstruct at all costs. This argument invokes a moral category that is
too often overlooked in accounts of postwar justice: This is the category of what it is
good or even honorable to do, rather than what it is obligatory or required to do. All
moral reasons do not generate duties. Duties are severe obligations of a very specific
sort. For instance, the cashier at the coffee shop has a duty to give you your change.
If he does in fact give you your correct change, he should not be applauded: it would
be strange to say, “My change—and all of it! How very good of you!” Honesty, in
this case, is not an option; it is an obligation. But in other cases, moral reasons endorse
options without issuing in requirements. To say that countries with airlift capacity
and robust military force would do well to intervene to prevent atrocities—or to
rot19089_ch09.indd 162 ot19089_ch09.indd 162 10/7/11 2:32 PM 0/7/11 2:32 PMThe Ethics of Exit: Moral Obligation in the Afghan Endgame 163
build stable democratic institutions and flourishing economies in the postwar phase
may be plausible. But to say in addition that they are obligated to overturn unjust
 regimes and replace them with better ones, no matter how long it takes and how much
it costs, is far less plausible. Were they to reconstruct a polity in a rights-respecting
way that laid good foundations for a durable and decent regime, this would be a very
good thing. But they would not be merely meeting a moral obligation; a full and successful
reconstruction would seem to go well beyond what any people are required
to do for any other.
The term that moral philosophers use for actions that go beyond duty is “supererogatory.”
If the term “supererogatory” is unfamiliar, the actions it describes are
not: They are common and essential to a decent society. Supererogatory acts are superior
to or beyond obligation; in colloquial terms, the word we use to describe these
acts is “good,” as in, “it was good of you to do that.” You didn’t have to, one might
say—but you did. And the proper response when someone treats you well or does
you a good deed is gratitude. We do not have to thank people for doing their duty,
any more than the landlord thanks us for paying the rent. But we do thank those who
do more than their obligations require. It is a good thing for one country to intervene
in another to arrest or prevent grave injustices—a very good thing. And it is a better
thing still to reconstruct the country’s politics and nourish its economic life. Nations
that undertake such efforts deserve gratitude and praise (unlike the shopkeeper who
gives you correct change). Nations that succeed in such ventures deserve glory. But
that which we honor is not necessarily that which is obligatory or required.
Jus post bellum is not simply about obligation. It contains a great number of
moral reasons that do not underwrite obligations, but that instead endorse acts that
it would be good to do. These reasons may conflict with each other, and they may
even conflict with moral obligations: We may be obligated to return responsibility
for the political life of a nation to a defeated people even though they seem destined
to fail, and even though at some level it would be good to oversee their politics longer,
such that they might have a better shot at success. Moral reasons do not form a
coherent whole, where each reason is consistent with and ordered alongside every
other. The moral world is home to intractable conflicts and dilemmas, which is why
navigating it requires judgment. This judgment includes prudence, or an awareness
of how things are likely to work out in practice, given all the various causes that
bear on the situation. Morality is not its own special province that ideally would rule
over politics and strategy (with the help of international institutions). Moral reasons
ought to be weighed alongside other kinds of reasons, sometimes taking priority,
sometimes not, allowing for the possibility that second-best is often best in practice.
Moral responsibilities do not crowd out political judgment. Political judgment is
not only about fitting particulars (particular actions or policies) under general categories
(like universal moral imperatives). It involves a weighing of various kinds
of reasons, and is not separate from moral reasoning, but is part of moral reasoning.
Morality seems to have its greatest force in the realm of obligation, which is
why it is tempting to reduce all moral reasons to obligations, and then to insist that
moral obligations take precedence over every other kind of reason. Decent people
who want to reduce evil and improve the world want to make moral reasons more
rot19089_ch09.indd 163 ot19089_ch09.indd 163 10/7/11 2:32 PM 0/7/11 2:32 PM164 Russell Muirhead
forceful, and thus they may be tempted to make all morality equivalent to the most
forceful kind of morality: Everything moral becomes a moral obligation. This may
not lead to a more decent world, but rather to the tyranny of morality and the displacement
of political judgment. Good political judgment is always a kind of moral
judgment—and it entertains, as it must, moral reasons that go beyond obligation.
Specific jus post bellum Duties in Afghanistan
The extensive duties posited by many advocates of jus post bellum do not apply to
the United States as it contemplates exiting from Afghanistan. Rather, the minimal
understanding of jus post bellum applies, and the United States should be focusing
on equipping Afghanistan to carry on its national life while eliminating the
threat that al-Qaeda poses to the international world from its base there. It would
be consistent with the demands of postwar justice for the United States and NATO
to focus more on stability and legitimacy than on democracy and the enforcement
of individual rights. Legitimacy is a lower standard for politics than justice, and it
does not entail democratic institutions. Legitimacy refers to a condition where a
state is stable because it enjoys voluntary support from most of the social groups
that constitute the population. Justice is a more demanding condition, one that, as
it is generally understood in the West, looks to whether every individual within a
population could (in principle) agree to the basic structure of society.30 To construct
a regime that is just in this sense might be a good thing to do in Afghanistan; but it
is likely to require an occupation that lasts many decades and in the end renovates
many local understandings and customs. Such an undertaking, which would require
a great deal of policing and violence, is not required by postwar justice. Postwar
justice rather requires leaving a legitimate regime, one whose stability derives from
the support of social groups within the society. A legitimate state may not enjoy
support from every group or every individual. It may not be a just regime, in the
fullest sense. But it should house a domestic politics in which Afghans themselves
can work out their own understanding of a just polity.
To say that postwar justice is not entirely a matter of obligation does not mean
that obligations are irrelevant. On the contrary, occupying powers can incur specific
obligations to groups and persons by the agreements they make and the commitments
they take up in the course of a war or occupation. Moral obligations arise, as
Michael Walzer says, by “choosing to fight in someone else’s country” for many
years.31 Walzer has in mind the achievements that have emerged over the past
 decade in public health, health care, education, civil society, and politics. “A version
of democratic politics has emerged,” Walzer says. As Walzer sketches it, our
duty is in part to protect and sustain these works. But to say that we are bound to
defend and advance these achievements might be to embrace unlimited intervention
in Afghan affairs. The emerging vision of democratic life, after all, might be quite
fragile, the possession of a very small minority. What would be required to sustain it
might be expensive, intrusive, and ultimately ineffective. To sustain these achievements
would be a good thing; but to say that it is a duty is another and more severe
rot19089_ch09.indd 164 ot19089_ch09.indd 164 10/7/11 2:32 PM 0/7/11 2:32 PMThe Ethics of Exit: Moral Obligation in the Afghan Endgame 165
matter. Postwar justice does not require that we establish the sort of state we would
want to live in, but instead that we leave it to Afghans to build the sort of state they
would like to live in.
But building a state is rarely an entirely peaceful enterprise, which points to the
greatest moral calamity associated with exiting Afghanistan: a civil war between
the Taliban and non-Pashtun tribes. From one perspective, both the United States
and NATO could be seen as implicated in such a war, given that they have trained
a very large army that would be party to the combat. Aside from bearing some responsibility
for the destruction and killing that such a war would entail, both Europe
and the United States would be obligated to assist the millions of refugees that such
a war would inevitably produce. The question is whether the prospect of such a civil
war entails a duty to continue occupying Afghanistan while stabilizing and rebuilding
the Afghan polity until the prospects of such a war are remote. If this were the
case, then in practice the goals of minimalist postwar justice might require the same
ambitious policies as maximalist postwar justice.
But this is not necessarily the case. First, it is important not to overstate the
responsibility of the United States and NATO for Afghanistan’s civil strains: The
conflict between modernists and traditionalists in Afghanistan antedates the US
invasion, and is not a product of the war against al-Qaeda. Outside powers do not
have blanket permission to intervene in civil wars, as terribly violent and intractable
as civil wars tend to be. To say that the United States or NATO has an obligation
to prevent any possibility of civil war in Afghanistan because it invaded in
its own self-defense would be to issue a blanket permission to intervene in Afghan
domestic politics. Finally, recognition that it is not a moral obligation to prevent
an Afghan civil war at all costs should direct attention to ways of minimizing the
possibility for civil war that fall short of sustaining a massive occupation that aims
to wholly renovate the Afghan polity. The parties to civil conflict may not be able
to afford a war, for instance, in the absence of outside funding. The United States
might more efficiently meet its moral obligations by policing the stream of money
flowing to Afghanistan, especially to the Taliban.
If the United States does not have an absolute obligation to prevent civil war,
it might nonetheless have obligations to specific people and parties in Afghanistan
that have worked with the United States to create a democratic state that protects
individual rights and liberties. Our obligation is to specific people, our allies in the
cause of building an open, liberal, and democratic society.32 This is a different and
more specific kind of obligation, and it should be central in any plans for exiting
Afghanistan (and Iraq, for that matter). The question is, “Who has helped us; who
has taken risks to advance our goals; who has made our goals his or her goals—who
shares the cause; and who among these friends is likely to be punished or worse
after we exit as a result of their help?”
For instance, thousands of Iraqis assisted coalition troops, especially but not
only in interpretation and translation. They did so at enormous risk, and many suffered
kidnapping, torture, and death.33 To abandon Iraqi employees in the wake of
an exit would be to condemn hundreds or thousands of people to death—it would be
to abandon our political friends. If we cannot stay in Iraq and protect them—and we
rot19089_ch09.indd 165 ot19089_ch09.indd 165 10/7/11 2:32 PM 0/7/11 2:32 PM166 Russell Muirhead
cannot—we should give them US citizenship and generously enable their transition
to American society. Indeed, the United States has done far too little to assist its
Iraqi employees in obtaining not merely visas, but citizenship, and in making the
resettlement to the United States successful. A special immigrant visa program was
established in the 2008 Refugee Crisis in Iraq Act that created twenty-five thousand
slots for Iraqi employees of the US government over five years, but better implementation
and more slots will be required if we are to avoid a catastrophic abdication
of duty to the Iraqis who worked for coalition troops.34
The United States and NATO have a similar duty in Afghanistan to Afghans
who directly worked for International Security Assistance Force troops. But the
special duties that arise in a just withdrawal do not stop with those who were directly
employed by NATO troops. The two million Iraqi girls who have attended
schools, and the teachers who run these schools, are all potentially exposed to retaliation
after the exit of NATO troops. In a case like this, it is even less feasible
to resettle each girl and her extended family in the United States, and a more determined
diplomatic approach with both formal and informal rulers of Iraq will be
necessary. It is not unimaginable that negotiations with the Taliban might elicit
enforceable guarantees of security for Afghan schoolgirls, and something like that
seems already to be developing.35 The moral obligation to protect Afghan girls who
attended school at our urging and with our protection is so urgent that it should be
at the center of any withdrawal plans and should constrain strategic actions so that
they conform with whatever is necessary to accommodate the duty.
This kind of duty, to Afghan schoolgirls and Iraqi translators, is a special and
specific duty—and it is a duty. It would not merely be “good” to protect our friends
and allies; it is essential. Reprisals following our exit would be a moral failing and
a human catastrophe, not to mention a strategic error in that it will harm the reputations
and credibility of NATO and the United States. If one were to ask where these
specific duties come from, we could liken them to the idea of a promise. We made
an implicit promise to both Afghan schoolgirls and Iraqi translators that we would
construct a certain kind of society, one where the values of equality and freedom
would prevail. If we exit without having made good on our grandest promise for
social and political reform, we should not let those who believe in us suffer rape,
torture, and death as a consequence of our own failure.
Some might argue that the moral obligations involved in such promises do
not generate an urgency to do whatever is necessary to protect those who relied on
us. After all, some would insist that in the real world, parties to contracts should
 “beware” and take due precautions against the possibility that the other party may
not be able to make good on its end of the deal. This argument might hold that so
long as the United States made a full and good faith effort to keep up its end of the
deal; then it has done its part. If it proved inadequate to fully realize its grandest
intentions, well, this argument might say, so it goes. In politics, nothing is certain.
But what is at stake here is not merely a promise. It is a cause. The Iraqi translators
may have worked for coalition troops because it was a well-paying job and
the Iraqi economy, destroyed by both tyranny and war, produced very few other
jobs. But no doubt many joined not only for this reason but also because they
rot19089_ch09.indd 166 ot19089_ch09.indd 166 10/7/11 2:32 PM 0/7/11 2:32 PMThe Ethics of Exit: Moral Obligation in the Afghan Endgame 167
shared the goal of creating a rights-respecting democracy in Iraq. Our vision was
also their vision. The same is true of the feminists, teachers, and even schoolgirls in
 Afghanistan: They were not opportunists looking for a check to cash, but believers
in a society that treats women with respect and invests in each person’s growth and
potential. These people are not merely self-interested agents standing on the other
side of a promise; they are our allies, our political friends, our fellow partisans. The
obligations at stake are political and partisan. Every cause in politics is a partisan
cause, because there is no cause that is in everyone’s interest or commands universal
assent. Accomplishing anything in the political world, no matter how good it
may seem, requires a team, because every cause is embattled. Political action takes
friends, or partisans, who stand by you as you stand by them. And partisans, or
political friends, owe something to each other. In particular they owe loyalty, for
without it, nothing—no matter how good—can ever be done.
We have inspired—and hired—allies, political friends, fellow partisans. In
both Iraq and Afghanistan, our allies have risked all to help us and to help their own
politics on the way to something more open, liberal, and democratic. These friends
should be at the center of any plans for exit, whenever exit may come. To abandon
them is to show ourselves unworthy of our own cause.