Michael_ragusa
Chemistry
The_beginning_of_the_end
1 Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA 2 Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, California Institute for Quantitative Biosciences, University of California, Berkeley,
CA 94720, USA
Autophagy is a conserved mechanism thatis essential for
cell survival in starvation. Moreover, autophagy maintains
cellular health by clearing unneeded or harmful
materials from cells. Autophagy proceeds by the engulfment
of bulk cytosol and organelles by a cup-shaped
double-membrane sheet known as the phagophore.
The phagophore closes on itself to form the autophagosome,
which delivers its contents to the vacuole or
lysosome for degradation. A multiprotein complex comprising
the protein kinase autophagy-related protein 1
(Atg1) together with Atg13, Atg17, Atg29, and Atg31
(ULK1, ATG13, FIP200, and ATG101 in humans) has a
pivotal role in the earliest steps of this process. This
review summarizes recent structural and ultrastructural
analysis ofthe earliest step inautophagosomebiogenesis
anddiscusses a model in which the Atg1 complex clusters
high-curvature vesicles containing the integral membrane
protein Atg9, thereby initiating the phagophore.
Autophagy and Atg proteins
Macroautophagy (hereafter autophagy) is a cellular selfdegradative
process in which cytosolic material is transported
to the vacuole or lysosome for degradation. Autophagy
evolved in unicellular organisms as a survival
mechanism to provide free amino acids and other metabolic
precursors during starvation [1]. Starvation is thus a potent
inducer of autophagy. However, even under normal cellular
conditions autophagy is important for the clearance of damaged
organelles and other toxic cytosolic materials. Autophagy
is the major mechanism by which entire organelles are
degraded. Thus, it is essential for cellular homeostasis in
eukaryotes. Functional autophagy is linked to lifespan
in many organisms and its dysfunction to numerous
degenerative diseases in humans, including cancer, neurodegeneration,
and susceptibility to infections [2].
During autophagy, bulk cytosol, organelles, and inclusions
are engulfed by a double-membrane vesicle termed
the autophagosome. Autophagosomes in yeast can range in
size from 300 to 900 nm (Figure 1A). Once mature, the
outer autophagosomal membrane fuses with the vacuolar
or lysosomal membrane. The entire contents of the autophagosome,
including the inner membrane, are then degraded
by lysosomal hydrolases. The resulting free amino
acids and other metabolic precursors are then recycled
back to the cytoplasm. Biogenesis of the autophagosome
occurs de novo in the sense that autophagosomes are not
formed by budding off another autophagosome [3,4]. This
raises questions regarding the origin of the autophagosomal
membrane, its mechanism of initiation, and the determinants
of its size and shape.
Autophagy can be both a selective and a nonselective
process. During nonselective autophagy, cytosolic components
are engulfed by the autophagosome in an untargeted
manner. Some of the autophagy machinery, however, is
dedicated to the consumption of particular organelles,
including mitochondria, lipid droplets, and peroxisomes,
and this process is referred to as selective autophagy. In
selective autophagy, the cargo being engulfed appears
capable of templating the size of the autophagosome.
For example, in yeast, a constitutive selective autophagy
pathway for cytosol-to-vacuole transport (Cvt) carries the
protease Ape1 to its vacuolar site of action (Figure 1B). In
nonselective autophagy, the double membrane gains its
Review
Glossary
Phagophore assembly site (PAS): identified in yeast as a punctate structure to
which most of the Atg proteins colocalize as they start to form the phagophore;
also known as the preautophagosomal structure.
Soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor (NSF) attachment protein receptor
(SNARE): the SNAREs comprise a large family of proteins whose main role is to
mediate vesicle fusion. R-SNARES contain a conserved arginine in the center
of the SNARE motif. Q-SNARES contain a conserved glutamine in the center of
the SNARE motif. Q-SNAREs are further classified as Qa, Qb, or Qc dependent
on their position in the four-helix bundle.
Transport protein particle (TRAPP) complex: first identified as a tethering
factor involved in ER to Golgi transport. In yeast, three TRAPP complexes have
been identified. TRAPIII functions in the autophagy pathway.
0962-8924/$ – see front matter
 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tcb.2013.07.008
Corresponding author: Hurley, J.H. (jimhurley@berkeley.edu).
Keywords: SNAREs; Atg1; Atg9; Atg13; autophagy; ULK1; membrane bending;
vesicle tethering.
Trends in Cell Biology, January 2014, Vol. 24, No. 1 73
The autophagosomal membrane is initiated by the
fusion of small vesicles to form a sheet (Figure 1A). The
membrane sheet continues to elongate to become a cupshaped
structure called the phagophore (also known as the
isolation membrane). Ultimately, the phagophore folds
back on itself and the neck of the cup is sealed to form
the closed autophagosome.
Most of what is known about autophagosome biogenesis
comes from genetic studies in the budding yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae [5]. There are now 36 ATG
genes that have been discovered through S. cerevisiae
genetics. Most of these were subsequently found to be
conserved and to have parallel functions in multicellular
eukaryotes. It is therefore thought that most of the core
mechanisms of autophagy are conserved from yeast
to humans. The Atg proteins belong to six functional
groups (Table 1). Among the Atg proteins, we are here
primarily concerned with the Atg1 complex (ULK1 and
ULK2 in humans) and the integral membrane protein
Atg9, which are involved in the very earliest stages of
autophagy. Recently, it has become clear that the Atg1
complex and Atg9 act in concert with various generalpurpose
membrane-trafficking proteins including soluble
N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor (NSF) attachment protein
receptor (SNARE) proteins (see Glossary), secretory
proteins, Rabs and Rab guanine nucleotide exchange
factors (GEFs), and tethering factors. Many of these
proteins are better known for their roles in endocytoplasmic
reticulum (ER)-to-Golgi trafficking and exocytosis
and lessons from these fields have helped to provide
insights into the roles of these components in autophagy.
This review focuses on recent progress in our understanding
of the initial stages of autophagosome formation,
whereby an initial membrane source is provided, tethered,
and fused to form a double-membrane sheet. We focus
primarily on bulk nonselective autophagy in yeast, but
highlight recent progress in the mammalian autophagy
field. This review also emphasizes how Atg9 and the
Atg1 kinase complex work together with other membrane-trafficking
proteins to initiate formation of the
autophagosome.
Autophagosome formation begins at the phagophore
assembly site (PAS)
In yeast, autophagy is initiated at a single diffractionlimited
punctum as defined by light microscopy, referred
to as the PAS (also known as the preautophagosomal
structure) [6] (Figure 2A). The PAS is located near the
vacuole and is the site of recruitment for all of the protein
and membrane components required for autophagosome
biogenesis. Yeast cells normally contain a single PAS,
regardless of whether the cells are exposed to nutrientrich
or -limiting conditions. Under nutrient-rich conditions
in yeast, the PAS serves as the point of initiation
for Cvt vesicle biogenesis. Under starved conditions,
nonselective autophagosome biogenesis in yeast commences
at the PAS. Mammalian cells do not have a
Cvt pathway and so lack a constitutive PAS. Autophagy
in mammalian cells is analogous to that described in
yeast in that both commence at a unique locus. Mammalian
autophagy has been proposed on the basis of the
most recent findings to commence either at the ER–
mitochondrial junction [7] or the ER–Golgi intermediate
compartment (ERGIC) [8].
The genetic hierarchy of Atg protein recruitment at the
PAS in response to the upregulation of nonselective autophagy
has been delineated [9] (Figure 2B). Three members
of the Atg1 complex – Atg17, Atg29, and Atg31 – are
the most upstream components of nonselective autophagy
and are constitutively recruited to the PAS under both
nutrient-rich and -limiting conditions [9,10]. Withoutthese
Atg9 vesicles Atg9 vesicles
(A) (B)
Protein
150 nm
600 nm
Autophagosome
Vacuole
Vacuole
Phagophore
PAS
PAS
Phagophore
Phagophore
20 nm
Aggregates
Ribosome
Peroxisome
Mitochondria
TRENDS in Cell Biology
Figure 1. Autophagy and the cytosol-to-vacuole transport (Cvt) pathway in yeast.
(A) Starvation-induced bulk autophagy. Autophagosome biogenesis begins with a
pool containing an estimated three autophagy-related protein 9 (Atg9)-positive
vesicles, which may be as small as 20 nm in diameter. These vesicles fuse into a
double-membrane sheet that becomes the phagophore. The phagophore grows by
addition of membrane and adopts the shape of a cup. The cup engulfs
mitochondria, peroxisomes, ribosomes, inclusions, and bulk cytosol. The
opening of the phagocytic cup eventually fuses and the structure is now the
autophagosome, which in yeast is 300–900 nm in diameter. The autophagosome
then fuses with the vacuole (lysosome in mammalian cells) such that the inner
membrane and all of the contents are hydrolyzed. (B) The Cvt pathway, a
constitutive transport process in yeast with analogies to mammalian selective
autophagy. The Cvt pathway begins with the fusion of Atg9 vesicles, as in (A). The
main difference in this pathway is that the size and shape of the phagocytic cup are
dictated by the size and shape of the substrate being engulfed, which is usually a
single entity. Here, a particle of the vacuolar peptidase precursor prApe1 is shown.
Review Trends in Cell Biology January 2014, Vol. 24, No. 1
74three proteins and their selective autophagy counterpart
Atg11, additional Atg proteins will not localize to the PAS.
In mammalian cells, FIP200 is thought to be the functional
counterpart of Atg11 and Atg17.
The human orthologs of Atg1 are ULK1–4, of which
ULK1 is the most well known. Only ULK1 and ULK2 have
demonstrated roles in mammalian autophagy [11,12].
ULK1 assembles into a complex with ATG13, FIP200,
and ATG101 [13–17]. The C-terminal domain of ULK1 is
capable of targeting membranes in cells [18] and, as described
below, is now referred to as the early autophagy
targeting/tethering (EAT) domain. ATG13 is regulated by
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR). ULK1 and
ATG13 association appears to be constitutive. The phosphorylation
status of ATG13 is most likely involved in
regulating the conformation and activity of ULK1 within
the context of the assembled complex [15]. Human FIP200
is a large predicted helical protein that is generally considered
to be the functional counterpart of yeast Atg11 and
Atg17, although it lacks statistically significant sequence
homology to these proteins. There are no known human
orthologs of Atg29 and Atg31 nor a yeast ortholog of
ATG101. Overall, the similarities between the ULK1
and Atg1 complexes outnumber the differences and they
are close enough thatthe core mechanisms described below
seem likely to be conserved.
Initiation of phagophore formation
Biogenesis and transport of autophagic precursor
vesicles
The sequential recruitment of autophagy factors and
membranes results in the production of an elongated
double-membrane sheet. The sheet curves into a cupshaped
structure termed the phagophore. The formation
of the phagophore is essential for autophagosome biogenesis
and serves as the precursor to autophagosome formation.
The initial membrane source required for phagophore
formation in yeast is provided by 20–30-nm vesicles containing
the integral membrane protein Atg9 [19]. Atg9
contains six transmembrane helices that place both the
N and the C terminus in the cytosol. Before autophagy
induction, Atg9 is found in a clustered cytosolic reservoir of
20–30-nm vesicles (Figure 3A) [19]. The purpose of this
reservoir appears to be to maintain a supply of Atg9
vesicles in a state that is inactive, but ready for rapid
delivery to the PAS in the event of their need.
Atg9 vesicles are generated in yeast through Golgirelated
secretory and endosomal pathways [19–21]. In
human cells in nutrient-rich media, ATG9 exists within
the trans-Golgi network (TGN), recycling endosomes, early
endosomes, and late endosomes [22,23]. Further details
of Atg9 sorting have primarily been elucidated in yeast.
Yeast Atg23 and Atg27, a peripheral and a type I integral
membrane protein, respectively, are essential for the traf-
ficking of Atg9 vesicles from the Golgi to their reservoir
[24–26] (Figure 3B). These Atg9-containing vesicles do not
contain typical ER, TGN, or endosomal markers [19],
suggesting that Atg9 vesicles are produced from the
TGN in a manner dependent on Atg23 and Atg27 but
divergent from the main secretory and endosomal pathways
exiting the TGN.
Once formed, the transport of Atg9-containing vesicles
away from the Golgi in yeast requires the post-Golgi
secretory proteins Sec2 and Sec4 [27]. Sec4 is a Rab
Table 1. The six functional groups of Atg proteins.
Complex Yeast Human Complex role
Atg1/ULK1 complex Atg1 ULK1/2 Atg1, which is a Ser/Thr kinase, forms an autophagy-specific complex with Atg13,
Atg17, Atg31, and Atg29. Atg17, Atg31, and Atg29 form a stable 2:2:2 complex
regardless of cellular nutrient status and serve as a scaffold that is important for
protein localization to the PAS.
Atg13 ATG13
Atg17 FIP200
Atg29
Atg31
ATG101
Class III PI 3-kinase
complex
Vps34 VPS34 The class III PI 3-kinase complex is responsible for the production of PI
3-phosphate (PI3P) at the PAS. Atg14 specifically targets the complex to the PAS.
Vps15 VPS15
Vps30/Atg6 Beclin 1
Atg14 ATG14L/BARKOR
Atg2–Atg18 complex Atg2 ATG2 Atg18 is a PI3P sensor that forms a complex with Atg2 and Atg9.
Atg18 WIPI1–4
Atg12 conjugation Atg12 ATG12 Atg7 (E1-like enzyme) and Atg10 (E2-like enzyme) conjugate Atg12 to Atg5. Atg16
is a homodimer that forms a complex with Atg5 and Atg12 and is important for
Atg8–phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) conjugation.
Atg7 ATG7
Atg10 ATG10
Atg5 ATG5
Atg16 ATG16L1/2
Atg8 conjugation Atg8 LC3A/B/C
GABARAP
GABARAPL1/2/3
Atg4 is a hydrolase that activates Atg8/LC3. Atg8 is conjugated to PE through
Atg7 (E1-like enzyme), the Atg12–Atg5–Atg16 complex, and Atg3 (E2-like
enzyme).
Atg4 ATG4A-D
Atg7 ATG7
Atg3 ATG3
Atg9 associated Atg9 ATG9 Integral membrane protein involved in autophagy. Atg23 is a peripheral
membrane protein required for Atg9 trafficking from the Golgi. Atg27 is a type I
integral membrane protein required for Atg9 trafficking from the Golgi.
Atg23
Atg27
Review Trends in Cell Biology January 2014, Vol. 24, No. 1
75GTPase known for its role in exocytic vesicle delivery to the
plasma membrane, whereas Sec2 is a GEF for Sec4 [28].
Sec4 binds directly to the octameric exocyst complex, which
targets secretory vesicles to the plasma membrane for
exocytosis. Sec2, Sec4, and the exocyst complex have all
been implicated in autophagy and their role in autophagy,
driving the transport of Atg9 vesicles, may be analogous to
their role in exocytosis [29].
Vesicle clustering at the PAS
Atg9 recruitment is one of the earliest events at the PAS,
occurring immediately downstream of Atg17. At the PAS,
Atg9 resides in a cluster of approximately 20–30-nm vesicles
and tubes [19]. Each vesicle is estimated to contain
approximately 27 copies of Atg9 [21]. Yeast cells typically
contain one to three separate Atg9 pools and, on autophagy
induction, a single pool of Atg9 vesicles is translocated to
the PAS [19]. In wild type cells, the vesicles at the PAS
under starvation conditions are hard to differentiate by
electron microscopy (EM) from the Atg9 reservoir described
above. However, in atg1D and atg13D cells, visually
striking clusters of unfused Atg9 vesicles are formed
surrounding the Cvt cargo, prApe1 particles (Figure 3C)
[19]. These observations suggest that the phagophore
emerges by the coalescence of small Atg9-containing vesicles
and that clustering and fusion occur as separate steps.
It has been estimated that three Atg9 vesicles are required
to assemble at the PAS and fuse to initiate one autophagosome
[21]. Recent work has identified that the most upstream
autophagy regulatory complex, the Atg1 complex,
is capable of tethering 20–30-nm vesicles in vitro [30],
suggesting that it is the most likely candidate for an
Atg9 vesicle-tethering factor.
Regulation of vesicle clustering and Atg1 complex
assembly
ATG1 was the first ATG gene to be discovered. It is an
amusing coincidence that the multiprotein complex-containing
Atg1 is also the first to arrive at the PAS. Atg1 comprises
an N-terminal Ser/Thr kinase domain connected by a flexible
linker to a C-terminal EAT domain [18,30]. The Atg1 kinase
complex is inactivated under normal cellular conditions
through phosphorylation of both Atg1 and Atg13 by Tor
[31,32] and protein kinase A (PKA) [33]. On starvation,
Atg13 becomes dephosphorylated and binds directly to the
EAT domain of Atg1 and to Atg17. It thus acts as a bridge
between Atg1 and Atg17, triggering the assembly of the
subunits into a dimer of pentamers. Atg17 is in a constitutive
complex with the small proteins Atg29 and Atg31. The
Atg17–Atg31–Atg29 complex forms an extended double
crescent-shaped dimer and dimerization of the complex
through the C-terminal a-helix of Atg17 is essential for
autophagy activity in yeast [30]. The full Atg1 complex thus
exists as a dimer of Atg1–Atg13–Atg17–Atg31–Atg29 pentamers
[30]. Mutation ofthe eightidentified Atg13 phosphorylation
sites to Ala induces Atg1 complex formation in the
absence of autophagy induction [34]. Moreover, a trimmed
Atg1 complex pentamer can be reconstituted from dephosphorylated
subunits expressed in Escherichia coli [30]. Recently,
a constitutive interaction between Atg1 and Atg13
was observed [35], suggesting that the Atg1 complex is
regulated primarily at the level of its activity rather than
its assembly. Although it is no longer clear whether the
binding of yeast Atg1 and Atg13 to one another is phosphoregulated,
available evidence suggests that the Atg13–Atg17
interaction and thus the subsequent localization of Atg1
and Atg13 to the PAS is dependent on nutrient status.
Structural model for vesicle clustering
The protein kinase activity of Atg1 seems to be dispensable
for the earliest autophagic events [36]. Instead, the Atg1
complex in early autophagy may act as a scaffold to organize
the 20–30-nm Atg9 vesicles in a manner allowing
them to fuse into a membrane sheet. This model stems
from the following observations: first, Atg17 interacts directly
with Atg9, an interaction required for Atg9 localization
to the PAS [37]; second, the crystal structure of Atg17–
Atg31–Atg29 revealed an S-shaped scaffold in which the
(A) (B)
PAS
V
PI(3)P sensor
Atg1 complex
PI 3-kinase
6-pass integral
membrane protein
Ubiquin-like proteins
and their conjugaon
system
8 Phosphadylethanolamine
2 18 5 12 16
1 6 14
13 9
17 29 31
TRENDS in Cell Biology
Figure 2. The preautophagosomal structure. (A) Fluorescence micrograph of the phagophore assembly site (PAS). (B) Schematic of the genetic hierarchy of autophagyrelated
protein (Atg) recruitment to the PAS.
Review Trends in Cell Biology January 2014, Vol. 24, No. 1
76
size of the Atg9 vesicles (Figure 4A); third, the EAT domain
of Atg1 binds selectively to highly curved 20–30-nm vesicles
in vitro and is capable of tethering these vesicles to
each other; and fourth, the Atg17–Atg31–Atg29 subcomplex
regulates the activity of the EAT domain, an indication
of the interplay between the membrane-binding and
membrane protein-binding elements in the complex. These
data suggest that vesicles are tethered via the dimer
interfaces of Atg1 and Atg17 and their binding to lipids
and to Atg9, respectively (Figure 4B–D). The juxtaposition
of the vesicles in this geometry places them about 20 A˚
apart. This does not bring them close enough to fuse on
their own, but could presumably position them such that
bridging SNARE complexes described below could finish
the job (Figure 4E).
The model outlined above provides an appealing structural
framework for Atg1 complex function early in autophagy,
yet also raises questions. The putative curved
vesicle-binding face of Atg17–Atg31–Atg29 is blocked in
the crystal structure, begging the question of whether and
how the concave face of Atg17 is liberated. Atg9 is an
attractive candidate, because this would confer a high level
of specificity for the nucleation of Atg9-positive vesicles
over all others in the cell. In the absence of biochemical
confirmation, an alternative model for Atg17-mediated
tethering could be that the concave face is fortuitous
and not involved in contacting Atg9 vesicles. Atg9 vesicles
accumulate at the PAS in the absence of Atg1, indicating
that Atg1-mediated tethering is not required for the initial
clustering. It seems mostlikely thattethering occurs in two
stages. First, Atg17 (and Atg29 and Atg31) loosely cluster
Atg9 vesicles, localizing them to the PAS. On recruitment
of Atg1 to the complex, the intervesicle distances might be
further shortened, priming them for SNARE-mediated
fusion. Clearly, many important details of these events
remain to be elucidated.
A second tethering complex, the transport protein particle
(TRAPP)III complex, has also been linked to the role of
Atg9 vesicles in autophagosome biogenesis. The three
known forms of the TRAPP complexes are multisubunit
GEFs for the Rab protein Ypt1. TRAPPI and II are involved
in ER and Golgi trafficking through vesicle tethering
[38,39], whereas TRAPPIII functions in autophagy
[40–44]. The TRAPPIII complex contains the subunits
Trs20, Trs23, Trs31, Bet5, and Bet3, which are common
to all of the complexes, and the unique autophagy-specific
subunit Trs85. Trs85 interacts directly with Atg9 and
thereby activates Ypt1 on Atg9 vesicles. The TRAPPIII
complex and Ypt1 are targeted to Atg9 vesicles before
arriving at the PAS [45]. Once at the PAS, Ypt1-GTP
has a role in targeting Atg1 by directly binding to its kinase
catalytic domain [46]. Atg1 thus appears to be a coincidence
detector whose targeting requires both dephosphorylated
Atg13 and GTP-bound Ypt1. Classical tethering
complexes like TRAPPIII operate over longer length scales
[38,47] than the short-range vesicle dimerization promoted
by the Atg1 complex. It would be an elegant solution if
MVB
(A) (C)
(B)
N
atg13Δ
Atg9-GFP15 Atg9-GFP15
M
M
PAS
TRAPPIII
Ypt1
Atg9 Atg23 Atg27
Atg9 reservoir
Exocyst Sec2
Sec4 Ykt6
TGN
Sso1/2
Sec9
V
TRENDS in Cell Biology
Figure 3. Biogenesis and coalescence of autophagy-related protein 9 (Atg9) vesicles. (A) Electron micrograph of Atg9 reservoir (arrow). Reproduced, with permission, from
[19]. (B) Schematic of the trafficking of Atg9 vesicles from the trans-Golgi network (TGN) to the Atg9 reservoir and onward to the PAS. Atg9 emerges from the TGN in
tandem with Atg23 and Atg27, a peripheral and a single-crossing integral membrane protein, respectively. Atg9 vesicles emerging from the TGN are sorted to a cytosolic
reservoir near the mitochondrion in a process depending on the Rab/Rab guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) pair Sec2 and Sec4, the soluble N-ethylmaleimidesensitive
factor (NSF) attachment protein receptors (SNAREs) Ykt6, Sso1/2, and Sec9, and the exocyst complex. Once at the reservoir, the Atg9 vesicles acquire another Rab
protein, Ypt1, and its multimeric GEF, the transport protein particle (TRAPP)III complex. (C) Coalescence of Atg9 vesicles is highlighted most dramatically adjoining a
preApe1 particle in atg13D cells. Reproduced, with permission, from [19]. Abbreviations: V, vacuole; M, mitochondrion; MVB, multivesicular body. Scale bars, 200 nm.
Review Trends in Cell Biology January 2014, Vol. 24, No. 1
77TRAPPIII, Atg17, and Atg1 tether vesicles in successively
closer physical proximity at successive steps in the pathway.
The activation of a Rab protein by the upstream
tethering complex TRAPPIII such that a second complex,
Atg1, is recruited is also reminiscent of classical tethering
pathways [38,47].
Fusion of vesicles
The early phase of autophagosome initiation culminates
with fusion of the precursor vesicles to form the phagophore.
These fusion events are most likely mediated by
SNARE proteins [48–50]. SNAREs are a large family of
proteins that mediate the fusion of vesicles with one another
or with target membranes. When complementary
SNAREs on two membranes zipper into a four-helix bundle,
this drives the membranes into such close proximity
that fusion ensues [51]. SNARES are classified as QSNARES
and R-SNARES, based on the presence of a
conserved glutamate (Q) or arginine (R) residue in the
SNARE motif. Functional bundles comprise three QSNARES
– Qa, Qb, and Qc – and one R-SNARE. The
SNAREs involved in early autophagy include members
of all ofthe appropriate classes and thus in principle should
be sufficient to drive fusion.
The Q-SNARES Sso1/2, Sec9, and Tlg2 have a major
role in very early stages of autophagy initiation [50]
(Figure 3B). The absence of Sso1/2 prevents formation of
the tubulovesicular Atg9 clusters discussed above. Under
these conditions, Atg9 is dispersed in the cytosol in small
vesicles. Because loss of these SNAREs leads to a block in
Atg9 transport to the PAS, it has not been directly demonstrated
that they are involved in Atg9 vesicle fusion at the
PAS. Clearer evidence for a SNARE function in vesicular
precursor fusion into the phagophore is seen in human
cells. In HeLa cells, the importance of SNAREs in the
fusion of small vesicles required for autophagosome biogenesis
has been demonstrated, because accumulation of
small Atg16L-positive vesicles was observed when
VAMP7, syntaxin-7, syntaxin-8, and VT1B were depleted
[48]. It is appealing that this collection of SNAREs also
includes one member of each of the essential bundle components
Qa, Qb, Qc, and R. The Atg16L1 vesicles studied in
HeLa cells are similar in size and might correspond to the
yeast Atg9 vesicles, although this remains to be seen [49].
Additionally, this might suggest a role for a secondary
population of small vesicles in addition to Atg9 vesicles
for autophagosome biogenesis. This seems likely, because
studies in yeast have suggested that Atg9 provides only a
small portion of the total membrane required for autophagosome
biogenesis. Nevertheless, the presence of Atg16-
positive vesicles suggests that mammalian phagophores
originate from the fusion of a pool of small cytosolic vesicles,
as in yeast, and that SNAREs are required for this
fusion event.
Fusion of Atg9 vesicles into the yeast phagophore
has already begun at an early stage in the recruitment
of Atg proteins to the PAS. This is demonstrated by the
formation of tubules in the absence of Atg14, as visualized
by EM [19]. Atg14 is the autophagy-specific subunit
of phosphatidylinositol (PI) 3-kinase, which is recruited
by the N-terminal HORMA domain of Atg13 [52]. By
contrast, when SNARE-mediated fusion is blocked in
human cells, the recruitment cascade can proceed at least
to the stage of Atg16 [48]. Thus, there does not appear to
be an Atg recruitment checkpoint for membrane fusion. In
other words, when fusion is frustrated, the later Atg
proteins still seem to be recruited to the PAS, albeit
nonproductively.
(A) (B) (C)
(D) (E)
Atg29-
Atg31
Atg17
Atg1
Vesicles get closer to each other SNAREs
Atg9
Atg9
Vesicle
Vesicle
Atg29
Atg29
Atg31
Atg17
Atg31
Atg17
TRENDS in Cell Biology
Figure 4. The autophagy-related protein 1 (Atg1) complex and a model for vesicle tethering. (A) Crystal structure of the autoinhibited Atg17–Atg31–Atg29 complex [30].
(B–E) A hypothesis for the tethering and fusion of Atg9 vesicles by the Atg1 complex and soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor (NSF) attachment protein receptors
(SNAREs). For clarity, Atg13 is not depicted in the cartoon (B). In uninduced conditions, the Atg17–Atg31–Atg29 subcomplex resides at the phagophore assembly site (PAS)
but does not scaffold because the Atg29–Atg31 module sterically blocks the concave surface of Atg17. (C) Following autophagy induction, Atg9 vesicles migrate to the PAS,
where the binding of Atg9 to Atg17 competitively displaces Atg29–Atg31. Alternatively, some other activation signal might disinhibit Atg17, leading to the subsequent
binding of Atg9 vesicles to the double crescent. In this state, Atg9 vesicles are scaffolded in proximity to one another, but are not tethered tightly enough for membrane
fusion. (D) Atg13 is recruited to the PAS following its dephosphorylation, with the recruitment of Atg1 occurring simultaneously or subsequently. The early autophagy
targeting/tethering (EAT) domain of Atg1 tightly tethers the two vesicles in conjunction with their preexisting scaffolding by Atg17. In the final step in this speculative
model, (E), SNAREs form appropriate pairings across the gap between the two vesicles and drive their homotypic fusion.
Review Trends in Cell Biology January 2014, Vol. 24, No. 1
78From initiation to extension
Once the early fusion events are over, most of the early
PAS proteins remain as a punctate complex [53]. Atg17
and the PI 3-kinase complex are among the factors that
remain at the PAS during the growth of the phagophore
(Figure 5). The major protein marker for the phagophore
and the most downstream Atg protein to arrive is Atg8,
which is covalently conjugated to the lipid phosphatidylethanolamine
(PE) in a ubiquitin cascade-like reaction.
Atg1 binds to Atg8 via a conserved motif, which was found
to be important for the stable recruitment of Atg1 to the
phagophore although it is not important for recruitment to
the PAS [35,54,55]. This observation was initially surprising
in that Atg1 arrives early to the PAS whereas Atg8
arrives much later. As the phagophore grows, however, a
portion of the Atg1 pool departs from Atg17 and the
PAS, following Atg8 over the phagophore [53] (Figure 5).
At this later stage of Atg1 function, its kinase activity is
required [56].
Concluding remarks
The past three years of progress in understanding the
structure and function of the yeast PAS have opened what
is probably the clearest window available on the earliest
events of autophagosome biogenesis. Having made the
jump from black box to working model, many new questions
have come into focus, while some older questions
have acquired new urgency.
Atg9, with its central role in initiation and its six
transmembrane-spanning regions, is at the heart of many
of these questions. Beyond acting as a marker for the select
pool of vesicles that initiates the phagophore, why is Atg9
so important? What is the reason for an apparently unique
and dedicated pathway for the production of Atg9 vesicles
from the Golgi apparatus? After initiation, Atg9 leaves the
PAS, binds to the Atg2–Atg18 complex, and is recycled out
of the phagophore. Why is it so important to clear Atg9 out
of the phagophore? What components of the generic endosomal
recycling machinery participate in Atg9 recycling?
Given that Atg17 is still resident at the PAS at this stage,
what dissociates Atg9 from Atg17? Could Atg9 function as
a marker for immature phagophores?
The sequence of Atg protein recruitment to the PAS is
now well defined, but the temporal coordination between
the Atg and key non-Atg proteins is far less clear. It will be
particularly critical to define when SNAREs, TRAPPIII,
and Ypt1 appear at the PAS relative to the Atg proteins.
The SNAREs required at the earliest point in yeast autophagy
seem to be required for Atg9 vesicle transport before
arrival at the PAS. Although it seems natural to expect
that the same SNAREs would drive Atg9 vesicle fusion at
the PAS, this remains to be demonstrated.
Atg17 has been crystallized in what appears to be an
inactive conformation. If this concept is correct, it begs the
question of what activates Atg17. Atg9 itself could be the
activator, but roles for Rab proteins, perhaps Ypt1, protein
phosphorylation, or other factors seem possible. Atg17 is
predicted, but not demonstrated, to tether vesicles on the
basis of its structure, whereas the Atg1–EAT domain has
been shown biochemically to tether vesicles. It will be
important to understand the structure of the EAT domain
dimer and its complex with Atg13 and Atg17 to explain
fully how vesicle tethering is coordinated. Ultimately, in
vitro reconstitution of the early Atg9 vesicle fusion events
by the Atg1 complex and the relevant SNAREs would
provide the strongest test of current models.
(A) (B)
(C)
(D)
(E)
(F)
PI3k 2
2
2
18
18
18
18
2
PI3k
PI3k
Atg8
Atg1
Atg1
Atg9
Atg17
Bulk
TRENDS in Cell Biology
Figure 5. From initiation to extension. A speculative model for the possible
continuing roles of the initiation machinery during phagophore extension. (A) A
recap of the initial tethering events depicted in Figure 4B–D. (B) Following
autophagy-related protein 9 (Atg9) vesicle fusion, the phagophore begins as a
small membrane sheet, visualized in 2D projection as a tube. (C) Atg9 vesicles are
estimated to provide less than 1% of the ultimate membrane content of the
autophagosome. The source and physical state of the bulk of the membrane
remains a controversial topic. It is noteworthy that the Atg1 early autophagy
targeting/tethering (EAT) domain has no apparent specificity for different lipid
compositions, sensing only high curvature. Moreover, membrane-inserting
curvature sensors can bind well to loosely packed neutral lipid mixtures such as
those of the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) [57], which is widely considered the major
source of lipid supply in autophagosome biogenesis. (D) The Atg1 complex, via
Atg13, recruits the phosphatidylinositol (PI) 3-kinase complex, although not
necessarily through a direct interaction [52]. After Atg8 conjugation begins,
some of the Atg1 subunit appears to dissociate from the phagophore assembly site
(PAS) [53] and localize to the phagophore surface via its Atg8 family interacting
motif (AIM) [35,54,55]. (E) PI 3-phosphate (PI3P) generated by the PI 3-kinase
complex diffuses over the phagophore surface and, together with Atg9, recruits
the Atg2–Atg18 complex. The Atg2–Atg18 complex, together with Atg1, somehow
mediates recycling of Atg9. (F) On autophagosome closure, the high-curvature rim
of the phagophore disappears, removing the binding sites for curvature-sensing
proteins such as Atg17. The dissociation of these proteins might be sensed by a
checkpoint for autophagosome maturation, signaling readiness for fusion with the
vacuole.
Review Trends in Cell Biology January 2014, Vol. 24, No. 1
79Most early PAS components seem to remain in place
throughout phagophore extension. This raises the question
of how generic Atg-negative vesicles are directed to fuse
with the growing phagophore. Based on the number and
size of the Atg9 vesicles involved in initiation, we estimate
that more than 99% of the lipid in the phagophore derives
from sources other than the initiating pool of Atg9 vesicles.
It would seem natural that some of the same machinery
involved in the initial fusion events would also be involved
in bulk membrane delivery, but this concept will need to be
tested.
There is strong evidence for some parallels between
autophagy initiation in mammals and yeast, suggesting
that many of the concepts outlined here will also be relevant
in mammalian cells. The EAT domain is conserved in
ULK1 and ULK2, which also act very early in autophagy.
The EAT domain of ULK1 can target membranes autonomously
[18]. SNAREs have a similar although not demonstrably
identical role in early steps in mammalian and
yeast autophagy. Mammalian FIP200 is a large predicted
helical protein that forms a complex with ULK1, acts
early in autophagy, and is predicted to be the functional
analog of Atg17. However, clear orthology between the
two remains to be demonstrated, because the structure
of FIP200 is unknown. Given the structural and conceptual
framework for the early steps of autophagy, it will be
fascinating to see how the picture is fleshed out in yeast
and in mammals in coming years.
Acknowledgments
Research in the Hurley laboratory was supported by the Intramural
Program of the NIH, NIDDK (J.H.H.), a Damon Runyon Cancer Research
Fellowship (R.E.S.), and Ruth Kirschtein NRSA fellowship GM099319
(M.J.R.).